A  SYSTEM OF ANICAL PHILOSOPH Y JOHN ROBISON, LL. D.  PROFESSOR OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH. VITH NOTES, BY DAVID BREWSTER, LL. D. THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF LONDON, AND SECERETAEY TO THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF EDINBEURGH. 1 IN FOUR VOLUMES, AND A VOLUME OF PLATES. 5 _—. VOL. III EDINBURGH: D FOR JOHN MURRAY, LONDON 1822. Library Q 160 Rę7 V v vO I. AsTRONOMY was ſirst studied as an art; subservient to the purposes of social lifee Some knowledge oſ the celestial motions was necessary, in every state of society, that ve might mark the progress of the seasons, which regulate the labours of the cultivator, and the migrations of the shepherd. It is necessary for the record of past events, and for the appointment of national meetings. While the motions of the heavenly bodies afford us the means oſ attaining these useſul ends, they also present to the curious philosopher a series of magniſicent phenomena, the operation oſ the greatest powers of material nature; and thus they powerfully excite his curiosity with respect to their causes. This circumstance alone makes the celestial motions the proper objects of attention to a student of Mechanical Philosophy, and he has less concern in the beautiful regularity and subordination which have made them s0 subservient to the purposes oſ Navigation, of Chronology, and the occupations of rural life. But the purposes of the mechanical philosopher canmot be attained without attending to that beauty, regularity, and subordination. These features are exhibited in every circumstance of the celestial motions that renders them susceptible of scientiſic arrangement and investigation; and a philosophical view canmot be taken, without the same accurate knowledge of the motions that is wanted for the arts of lifee It must be added, that society never would have derived the beneſits which it has received from astronomy, Voi. III. A : ASTRONOMY. vithout the labours oſ the philosopher; for, had not Newton, or some such exalted genius as Newton, speculated about the deſlecting forees which regulate the motions of the solar system, we never should have acquired that exquisite knovledge of the mere phenomena that is absolutely necessary for some of the most important applications of them to the artss. It was these speculations alone that have enabled our navigators to proceed with boldness through untried seas, and in a few years have almost completed the survey of this globe. And thus do we experience the most beneſicial alliance of philosophy and art. Since the motions oſ hodies are the only indications, characteristies, and measures of moving forces, it is plain, that the celestial motions must be accurately ascertained, that we may obtain the data wanted for the purpose oſ philosophical inference. To ascertain these is a task of great diſficulty; and it has required the continual eſforts of many ages to acquire just notions of the motions exhibited to our view in the heavens. For the same general appearances may be exhibited, and the same perceptions obtained, and the same opinions will be formed, by means oſ motions very different; and it is frequently very diſficult to seleet those motions which alone can exhibit every observed appearance. Iſ a person who is in motion imagines that he is at rest, and assumes this principle in his reasonings about the effects of the motions vhich he perceives, he mistakes the conclusions which he draws ſor real perceptions; and calls that a deception of sense, which is really an error in judgment. Errors, in our opinions concerning the motions oſ the heavenly hodies, are necessarily accompanied by ſalse judgments concerning their causes. Therefore, an accurate examination of the motions which really obtain in the heavens, must precede every attempt to investigate their causes. The most probable plan ſor acquiring a just and satisfactory knowledge of these particulars, is to ſollow the steps oſ our predecessors in this study, and ſirst to consider the more general and obvious phenomena. From thesæe ve must deduce the opinions which most ohviously suggest themsælves, to be corrected aſterwards, by comparing them with other phenomena, which may happen to be irreconcilable with them. ASTRONOMICAL PHENOMENA. 2. To an observer, whose view on all sides is bounded only by the sea, the heavens appear a concave sphere, of which the eye is the centre, studded with a great number oſ luminous bodies, of which the Sun and Moon are the most remarkable This sphere is called the s?PHERE OF THE STAREY HEAVENS. The only distances in the heavens which are the immediate objects of our observation, are arches oſ great circles passing through the different points of the starry heavens. Thereſore, all astronomical computations and measurements are performed by the rules of spherieal trigonometry. 3. We see only the halſ oſ the heavens at a time, the other halſ being hid by the earth on which we are placed. The great circle H B OD, (Fig. 1.) which sepurates the visible hemisphere H Z O from the invisible hemisphere H NO, is called the HORIZON. This is marked out on the starry heavens by the farthest edge of the sen The point Z immediately over the head of the observer is called the 2ExTH; and the point N, diametrically opposite to it, is called the naniæ. 4. The zenith and nadir are poles oſ the horizon. 5. If an observer looks at the heavens, while a plummet is suspended before his eye, the plumb line will mark out on the heavens a quadrant of a circle, vhose plane is per- pendicular to the horizon, and which therefore passes through the zenith and nadir, and through two opposite points of the horizon. Z ONH and Z B ND are such circless. They are called vERTICAL CIRCLES and AZIMUTH CIRCLES. 6. The aLTITUDE Of any celestial phenomenon, such as a star A, is the angle A CB, formed in the plane of the vertical circle Z AN, by the horizontal line C B and the line CA. This name is also given to the arch A B of the vertical cirele vhich measures this angle The arch Z A is called ZENITH DISTANCE of the phenomenon. 7. The aziuTH Of the phenomenon is the angle OCB, or OZ B, ſormed between the plane of the vertical cirele Z A B passing through the phenomenon, and the plane of some other noted vertical Z ON. The arch CB of the horizon, which measures this angle, is also frequently called the azimuth. 8. The starry heavens appear to turn round the earth, which seems pendulous in the centre of the sphere; and by this motion, the heavenly bodies come into view in the east, or RISE; they attain the greatest altitude, or cuLMINarE, and disappear in the west, or sæT. This is ealled the PIRST MOTION. 9. This motion is performed round an axis NS (Fig. 2.) passing through two points, N, S, called the poles oſ the world. In consequence of this motion, a celestial object A describes a circle AD BF, through the centre C oſ which the axis NS passes, perpendicularly to ĩts plane. This motion may be very distinctly perceived as follows: Let a point, or sight, be fixed in the inside of a sky-light fronting the north, and inclined southwards from the perpendicular at an angle equal to the latitude of the place An eye placed at this point vill see the stars through the glass of the window. Let the points of the glass, through vhich a star appears ſrom time to time, be marked. The marks will be found to lie in the cireumſerence oſ a cirele, the centre of which will mark the place oſ the pole in the heavens. 10. Those stars which are farthest from the poles will describe the greatest circles; and those will deseribe the largest possible cireles which are in the circumſerence of the cirele W Q E, which is equidistant from both poles. This cirele is called the EauATOR, and, being a great circle, it cuts the horizon in two points, E, W, diametrically opposite to each other. They are the east and west points of the horizon. 1l. If a great circle AN Q S E passes through the poles perpendicularly to the horizoon HWO E, it will cut it in the north and south points; and any star A will acquire its greatest elevation when it comes to the semicirele NAS, and its greatest depression when it comes to the semicirele NB S; and the arch D A F of its apparition will be bisected in A. 12. If the cirele AD B F of revolution be hetween the equator and that pole N which is above the horizon, the greatest portion of ĩt will be visible; but iſ it be on the other side of the equator, the smallest portion ill be visiblee One half of the equator is visiblee Some cireles of revolution are wholly above the horizon, and some are wholly below it. A star in one oſ the first is always seen, and one in the last is never seen. I. The distance A  oſ any point A ſrom the equator is called its nECLINATION, and the eircle AD BF, being parallel to the equator, is called a PARALLEL oF DECLINATION. 14. The angle £ CH, contained by the planes oſ the equator and horizon, is the complement of the angle NCO, which is the elevation of the pole. 15. The revolution oſ the starry heavens is perſormed in 230 56 4. It is called the DIURNAL REVOLUT ION. No appearance oſ inequality has been observed in it; and it is thereſore assumed as the most t perſect measure of time. 16. The time of the diurnal apparition or disparition of a point of the starry heavens is bisected in the instant oſ its culmination or greatest depression. The Sun, thereſore, is in the cirele NASQ at noonn. For this reason the cirele N A S Q is called the MERIDIAN. T7. A phenomenon whose cirele of diurnal revolution AD BF is on the same side of the equator with the elevated pole, is longer visible than it is invisible. The contrary obtains if it be on the other side ofſ the equator. I8. Any great circle NA æ S, or NB L S, (Fig. 8.) passing through the poles of the world, is called an nouR CIRCLE. 19. The angle £ CL, or NIL, contained between the plane oſ the hour-cirele N B L 8, passing through any phenomenon B, and the plane of the hour cirele N ãũ S, passing through a certain noted point  of the equator, is called the RiIGHT ASCENSION Of the phenomenon. The intereepted arch £ L of the equator, which measures this angle, is called by the same namee. 20. In assigning the place of any celestial phenomenon, we cannot use any points of the earth as points of reference. The starry heavens afford a very convenient means for this purpose. Most of the stars retain their relative situations, and may thereſore be used as so many points of reference. The application of this to our purpose requires a knowledge oſ the positions of the stars. This may be acquired. The difference between the meridional altitude of a star B, and oſ the equator, gives the arch A ſ, intercepted between the equator and the parallel of dèclination, or cirele of diurnal revolution A B D, described hy the star. And the time which elapses between the passage oſ this star over he meridian, and the passage of that point ẽ of the equator from which the right of ascensions are computed, gives the arch  L of the equator which has passed during this interval. Thereſore, an hour cũrele NL S being drawn through the point L oſ the equator, and a circle of revolution AB D being dra æn at the observed distance A ſſ ſrom the equator, the place oſ the star will be found in their intersection I. 2l. Globes and maps have heen made, on vhich the representations of the stars have been placed, in positions similar to their real positions; and catalogues oſ the stars have been composed, in which every star is set down with its declination and right ascension, this beiug the most convenient arrangement for the practical astronomer. Their longitudes and latitudes (to bo explained aſterwards) are also set down, in sepurate columns. The most noted oſ all these is the B”ITANNIC CATALOGUE, construeted by Dr Flamstead, from his own observations in the Royal Observatory at Greenwich. This catalogue contains the places of 8000 stars. It is accompanied by a collection oſ maps, Enown to all astronomers by the title of ATLAS CELESTIS. An useful abridgment of both has been published by Bode in Berlin, and by Fortin in Paris, in small quarto. Two planispheres have also been published by Seneæ, in London, constructed from the same observations, and executed with uncommon elegance; as also a particular map oſ that zone of the heavens to which all the planetary motions are limited. This is also executed with superior elegance and accuracy. The place oſ any phenomenon may be ascertainæd in ĩit within 5 oſ the truth, by mere inspection, without calculation, seale, or compasses. No astronomer should be unprovided with it. j 22. All these representations and descriptions oſ the starry heavens become obsolete, in some measure, in consequence oſ a gradual change in the deelination and right ascension of the stars But as this may be accurately computed, the maps and catalogues retain their original value, requiring only a little trouble in accommodating them to the present state oſ the heavens The Britannic Catalogue and Atlas are adjusted to the state of the heavens in 1690; and the planispheres, &e. by Senex, are the same. The editions of Paris and Berlin are for 1750. 23. In these maps and catalogues, it has been found convenient to distribute the stars into groupes, called coxSTELLATIONS; and figures are dravn, which comprehend all the stars of a group, and give them a sort of connexion and a name. Each star is distinguished by its number in the constellation, and also by a letter of the alphabet. Thus, the most brilliant star in the heavens, the Dog star, or Sirius, is known to all astronomers as No ꝗ, or as - Canis Majoris. The numbers always refer to the Britannic catalogue, it being considered as classical 24. Since the publication of that work, however, great additions have been made to our knowledge oſ the starry heavens, and several catalogues and atlases have been published in different parts of Europe. Of the catalogues, the most esteeemed are, I. a small catalogue oſ 389 stars, the places of which have been determined with the utmost care by Dr Bradley, at the Greenwich Observatory; 2. a catalogue of the southern stars by Abbè de la Caille; 3. a catalogue of the zodiacal stars by Tobias Mayer at Gottingen; and, lastly, a nev atlas celestis, consisting of a catalogue and maps oſ the whole heavens, and containing above 15,000 stars, by Mr Bode of Berlinn. The Rev. Mr Fr. Wollaston published, in 1750, a specimen of a general astronomical eatalogue of the fixed stars, arranged according to their declinations, folio, London, 1780. This is a most valuable work, containing the places of many thousand stars, according to the catalogues of Flamstead, La Caille, Bradley, and Mayer. These being arranged in parallel columns, ve see the differences between the determinations of those astronomers, and are advertised of any changes which have occurred in the heavenss The catalogue is accompanied by direetions for prosecuting this method of obtaining a minute survey of the whole starry heavens. In the valuable astronomical tables published in 1776 by the academy of Berlin, Mr Bode has given a similar synopsis oſ the eatalogues oſ Flamstead, La Caille, Bradley, and Mayer, not mdeed so extensive, nor so minute, as Wollastons, but of great use.* 25. Having thus obtained maps of the heavens, the place of a celestial phenomenon is ascertained in a variety oſ ways. 1. By its observed distance from two known stars. 2. By its altitude and azimuth. 3. Most accurately, by its right ascension and declination. 26. This last being the most aceurate method oſ ascertaining the place of any celestial phenomenon, observations of meridional altitude, and of TRANSITS over the meridian, are the most important. For an account of the manner of conducting these observations, and a deseription oſ the instruments, ve may consult Smith's Opties, vol. II. Mr Vince's Treatise of Practical Astronomy; La Lande's Astronomy, &. The MURAL QUADRANT, TRANSIT INSTRUMENT, and cLocE, are thereſore the capital furniture of an observatory; to which, however, should be added an EQUATORIAL INSTRUMENT for observing phenomena out of the meridian. Other instruments, such as the 2QUAL ALTITUDE INSTRUMENT, the RHOMBOIDAL RETICULA, the ZENITH SECTOR, and one or two more, are fitted for astronomers on a voyage. 27. The position of the meridian, and the latitude of the observatory, must be accurately determined. There are va* This Catalogue, reduced to 1820, is published in the EDINBURGN ENCYcLorænia, Art. AsTRONOMY, vol. IL. ꝑ. T45. Ep. + An aceount of the modern astronomieal instruments, as made by Mr Troughton, and the method of using them, will be found in the Epinnuncu Excvcrorævia, Articles AsTRoNomy, CIincLE, OBSURvarony, &cLED. rious methods oſ determining the meridian. The most accurate is to view a cireumpolar star through a teleseope which has an aceurate motion in a vertical plane, and © change the position of the telescope till the times which elapse hetween the successive upper and lower transits of the star are precisely equal. The instrument is then in the plane of the meridian (Fig. 4.) 28. In order to find the declination of a phenomenon more readily, it is convenient to know the inelination of the axis of diurnal revolution N S (Fig. 2.) to the horizon, the elevation of the pole N. The best method for this pur pose is to observe the greatest elevation IO, and the least elevation  O, of some circumpolar sta. The elevation of the pole N is half the sum of those elevations. 29. The elevation oſ the pole is different in diſferent places. An observer, situated 69 statute miles due north of another, ill find the pole elevated about a degree more above his horizon. From observations of this kind, the bulk and shape of the earth are determined. For it is plain that 860 times 69 miles must be the cireumference of the globe. It is found to be nearly an elliptical spheroid, of which the axis is 7904 miles, and the greatest diameter 7940 miles. This deviation from perſeet sphericity has been discovered by measuring, in the way now mentioned, a degree of the meridian in different latitudess. One was measured in Lapland, in latitude 669 0, and it measured 1229, 457 yards, exceeding 69; miles by 137 yards*. Another was measured at Peru, crossing the very equator. Tt contained 121,027 yards falling short of 69; miles by 1203 yards, and vanting 1480 yards, or almost a mile, of the other. Other degrees have been measured in intermediate latitudes; and it is clearly established, that the degrees graThis degree is supposed to be 200 French toises too great by M. Svanberg, who lately remeasured it.En. dually increase, as ve go from the equator towards either pole. 30. The length of a degree is the distance hetween two places where the tangents to the surſace are inclined to one another one degree, or where two plumb lines, which are perpendieular to the surſace of standing water, vill, vhen produced downwards, meet one another, intercepting an angle of one degree. The surſace oſ the still ocean is therefore less incurvated as we approach the poles, or it requires a longer arch to have the same curvaturee It is a degree oſ a larger cirele, and has a longer radius. Persons who do not consider the thing attentively, are apt to imagine, from this, that the earth is shaped like an egg; because, if we draw from its centre lines C N (Fig. 5.) CO, CP, C qQ, equally nclined to one another, the arches N O, O P, P Q, vill gradually increase from N towards Q. If these lines make angles of one degree with one another, they vill meet the surface in points that are farther and ſarther asunder, and the degree will appear to incrense as we approach the points E and Q, which we suppose, at present, o be the poles. But let such persons reflect, that iſ these lines ſfrom the centre are produced beyond the surface, they cannot be plumb lines, perpendicular to the surface oſ standing water. But iſ an ellip]?e NE S Q (Fig. 5.) he made to turn round its shorter axis N S, it vill generate a figure flatter round N and S than at E or Q. Iſ ve draw two lines a D and b B perpendicular to the curve in a and b, and exceedingly near one another, they vill be tangents 1o a curve A B DF, by the evolution oſ which the elliptie quadrant E a N is describedc AE is the radius of curvature of the equatoreal degree of the meridian E a N. NF is the radius of the polar degree, and a D is the radius of curvature at the intermediate latitude oſ a, ke. All these radii are plumb lines, perpendicular to the elliptical curve of the ocean. These plumb lines, thereſore, do not meet in the centre of the earth, as is commonly imagined, but meet in succession, in the circumference oſ the evolute A B D F. The carth is not a prolate spheroid like an egęg, but an oblate spheroid, like a turnip or bias bowl. S1. Since the axis of diurnal revolution passes through the centre of the earth, it marks on its surface two points, which are the poles of the earth. These are in the extremities of the axis of the terrestrial spheroid: In like manner, the plane of the celestial equator, passing through the centre of the earth, divides it into tvo hemispheres, the northern and southern, separated by the terrestrial equator. Also, the hour circles, passing through the earth's centre, mark on its surface the terrestrial meridians. 32. The position of a place on the surface of the earth is determined by its LATITUDE, or distance from the terrestrial equator, and its LONGITUDE, or the angular distance of its meridian, from some noted meridian. 88. Astronomical observations are made from a point on the surface of the earth, but, for the purposes of computation, are supposed to be made from the centre The angular distance between the observed place A (Fig. 6.) oſ a phenomenon S in the heavens, as seen from a place D on the earth's surface, and its place B, as viewed from the centre, is called the PARALLAX of the phenomenon. S4. Besides the motion of diurnal revolution, common to all the heavenly bodies, there are other motions, which are peculiar to some of them, and are observed by us by means of their change of place in the starry heavens. Thus, while the starry heavens turn round the Earth from east to west in 23' 56' 4, the Sun turns round it in 24. He must, therefore, change his place to the eastward in the starry heavens The Moon has an evident motion eastward among the stars, moving her own breadth in about an hour. There are five stars which are observed to change their places remarkably in the heavens, and are thereſore called æLANETS, or wanderers; while those which do not change their relative places are called PIXED 5TARS. The planets are, MERCURY, VENUS, MARS, JUPITER, and Sarvx. To these we must now add the planet discovered in 1781 by Dr Herschel, which he called the Georgian Planet, in honour of his sovereign George III. the distinguished patron of astronomy. Astronomers on the continent have not adopted this denomination, and seem generally agreed to call ĩt by the name of the discoverer. M. Piazzi, at Palermo, has discovered another, and M. Olbers, at Bremen, a third, vhich they have named Ceres and Pallas. None of the three are visible to the naked eye. 34. Phinets are distinguishable from the fixed stars by the steadiness of their light, while all the fixed stars are observed to twinkle The following symbols are ſrequently used: For the Sun........ ò For Mars....................... à the Moon......) Jupiter.................... u Mercury...... Satum..................... n Venus.......... Q Herschel or Uranus.... H. the Earih..... 3 l The motions oſ these bodies have hecome interesting on various accounts. In order to acquire a knowledge of their motions more easily, it is convenient to abstract our attention ſrom the diurnal motion, common to all, and attend only to their proper motions among the fixed stars. Of the proper Motions of the Sun. 85. We cannot observe the motion of the Sun among the fixed stars immediately, on account oſ his great splendour, which hinders us ſfrom perceiving the stars in his * A fourth, called Juno, was afterwards discovered by M. Harding in 1804, and a fiſth, called Vesta, by Dr Olbers, in 1807. A very full account of the Four New Planets will he found in the Supplement to Ferguson's Astronomy.EDP. : neighbourhood. But we can observe the instant oſ his coming to the meridian, and his meridional altitude (0.) The Sun must be in that point of the heavens which passes the meridian at that instant, and with that altitudee Or we can observe the point oſ the heavens which comes to the meridian at midnight, with a declination as far on one side of the equator as the Sun's observed deelination is on the other side of itt. The Sun must be in the pont of the heavens which is diametrically opposite to this point. ByY taking either of these methods, but particularly the first, we can ascertain a series of points of the heavens through which the Sun passes These are found to be in the circumference oſ a great cirele of the sphere AS VW (Fig. 7.), which cuts the celestial equator in two opposite points, A, V, and is inclined to it at an angle oſ 23° 28' nearly. This circle, or Sun's path, is called the æcLIPTIC. 36. In consequence of the obliquity oſ the ecliptie, the Sun's motion in it is accompanied by a change in the Suns declination and right ascension, by a change in the length of the natural day, and by a change of the seasons. Therefore, the revolution of the Sun in the ecliptic is performed in a yeur. 7. The points, V, A, are called EQuiNoCTIAL POINTs; because, when the sun is in these points, his cirele of diurnal revolution is the celestial equator, and thereſore the day and night are equa. The point V, through which he passes in the month of March, is called the VERNAL EQUI»Ox, and the point A is called the AUTUMNAL EQUINOX. The points S and W, where he is farthest from the equator, are called the soLsTITIAL POINTS, S8 being the summer, and W the winter solstic. The parallels oſ declination passing through the solstitial points are called TrOPICS. 88. Right ascension is always computed eastward on ſhe equator, from the vernal equinox. 39. The ecliptic pusses through the constellations Aries, distinguished by the Libra, distinguished by the symbol................... symbol....................  iii Taurus..................... 8 Scorſio.................... m Geminmi........ .......... .. 0 Sagittarius................... Cancer.............. ....a:...  Capricornus......... ...... 5 Leo........... .. ..... s Aquurius.................... æ Virgo............... TP; m Pisees...................à. These constellations are called the siGNs of the zoniAC; and a motion from west to east is said to be niRECT, Or Iv CONSEQUENTIA 8IGNORUM, vhile a contrary motion is called RETROGRADE, IN ANTECEDENTIA SIGNORUM. 40. The changes of the seasons were attributed by the ancients to the influence oſ the stars vhich were seen in the different seasons oſ the year. 41. The position of the ecliptic is invariable, and a complete revolution is performed in 365 days, G hours, 9 minutes, and 11 seconds. 42. If suecessive observations be made of the Sun's erossing the equator, it vill be found that the equinoctial points are not fixed, but move to the westward about 50 in a year, so that they would make a complete revolution in about à5,972 yearss. This is called the PROCESSION Oſ the EQUINOXES. 43. Sir Isanc Newton made a very ingenious and important inference from this astronomical fact. If we know the situation of the equinoctial points at the time of any historical event, the date of the event may be discovered He thinks that this position, at the time of the Argonautic expedition, may be inferred from the deseription given by Aratus of the starry heavens. The poet deseribes a celestial sphere by whieh Chiron, one of the heroes, directed their motions; and from this he deduces data for a chronology of the heroie or fabulous ages But, since the equinoctial points shiſt only at the rate of a degree in 72 years, and the Greeks were so ignorant, ſor ages aſter that epoch, that they did not know that the positions of the stars were changeable, it does not appear that much reliance can be had on this datum. We cannot, from the deseription by Aratus, be certain of the position of the vernal equinox vithin five or six degrees. This makes a diſference of 400 years in the epochs. 44. The axis oſ diurnal revolution is not always the same, and the poles oſ the heavens describe (in 25,972 years) a circle round the pole of the ecliptie, distant from it 230 28 I0 nearly. 45. On account of the westerly motion of the equinoctial points, the return of the seasons must be accomplished in less time than that oſ the Suns revolution round the heavens. The seasons return aſter an interval of 365 5 48' 45. This is called a TrROPICAL year, to distinguish it from the interval 365 69 I1/ called a sYDEREAL year. 46. Astronomers have chosen to refer the places oſ the heavenly bodies to the eeliptie, on account oſ its stability, rather than to the equator. For this purpose, great cireles, such as PV), ? Ap (Fig. 8.) are dravn through the poles P, ꝓ, oſ the ecliptic. These are called EcLIPTIC MErIDIANS. The areh AB of one of these circles, intercepted between a phenomenon A and the ecliptie, is called the LaritunꝶE oſ the phenomenon; and the arch VB, intercopted between the point V oſ the vernal equinox and the point B, is called the LONGITUDE of the phenomenon. This is sometimes expressed in degrees and minutes, and sometimes in signs, degrees, and minutes, each sign consisting oſ thirty degrees. 7. The motion of the Sun in the ecliptic is not uniform. On the fſirst of January his daily motion is nearly I' I I8". But on the ſirst of July, his daily motion is 57 I3. The mean daily motion is 5 08. The Suns place in the ecliptie, calculated on the supposition of a daily motion oſ 59 08, will be behind his observed place, from the beginnming of January to the beginning of July, and will be beſore it, from the beginning of July to the heginning of January. The greatest difference is about Io 55 827, which is observed about the beginning of April and October; at which times, the observed daily motion is 59 05”. 48. This unequable motion of the Sun appeared to the ancient astronomers to require some explanationn It had been received as a first principle, that the celestial motions were oſ the most perfect kindand this perfection was thought to require invariable sameness. Thereſore the Sun must be carried uniformly in the cireumference of a figure perſectly uniſorm in every partt. He must therefore move uniformly in the circumſerence of a eirele The astronomers therefore supposed that the earth is not in the centre of this cirele Let Ab P d (Eig. 9.) represent the Suns orbit, having the earth in E, at some distance from the centre C. It is plain, that if the Sun's motion be uniform in the cireumference, describing every day 59 08, his angular motion, as seen ſrom the earth, must he slower vwhen he is at A, his greatest distance, than when nearest to the earth, at P. It is also evident that the point E may be so chosen, that an arch oſ 5908 at A shall subtend an angle at E that is only 57 187, and that an arch oſ 5 05 at P shall subtend an angle oſ 6I' 18. This will be accomplished, if we make E P to E A as 57 Iò to 6I' 13-, or nearly as 14 to 15,. This was accordingly done; and this method of solving the appearances was called the eccentric hypòthesis. E C is the EccENTRICITY, and P E is to P C nearly as 25 to 29. 49. But although this hypothesis agreed very ell with observation in those points oſ the orbit where the Sun is most remote from the earth, or nearest to it, it was found to differ greatly in other parts oſ the orbit, and particularly about half vay between A and P. Astronomers, after trying various other hypotheses, were obliged to content themselves with reducing the eccentricity considerably, and also to suppose that the angular motion of 59 05 per day vas performed round a point e on the other side oſ the Vou. III. B - 2 L 18 ASTRONOMICAL PHE NOMENA. centre, at the same distance with E. This, however, was giving up the prineiple of perfeet motion, if its perfection consisted in uniformity; for, in this case, the Sun cannot have an uniform motion in the circumference, and also an uniform angular motion round e. Besides, even this amendment of the eccentrie hypothesis by no means agreed with the observations in the months of April and October; but they could not make it any better. 50. Astronomical computations are made on the supposition of uniform angular motion. The angle proportional to the time is called the mEAN MOTION, and the place thus computed is called the 3EAN PLAGE. The diſferences between the mean places and the observed, or TRUE PLACES, are oalled EQuATIONS. They are always greatest when the mean and true motions are equal, and they are nothing vhen the mean and true motions difſer most. For, while the true daily angular motion is less than the mean daily motion, the observed place falls more and more behind the cãleulated place every day; and although, by gradually quickening, it loses lesũſevery day, it still loses, and falls still more behind; and when the true daily motion has at last become equal to the mean, it loses no more indeed, but ĩt is now the farthest behind that can be. Next day it gains a little of the lost ground, but is still behind. Gaining more and more every day, by its increase of angular motion, it at last comes up with the calculated ; but now, its angular motion is the greatest possible, and difers most from the equable mean motion. 51. These computations are begun from that point of the orhit where the motion is slowest, and the mean angular distance from this point is called the MEAN ANOMALY. A table is made of the equations corresponding to each degree of the mean anomaly. The true anomaly is ſound by adding to; or subtracting from the computed mean anomaly, the equations corresponding to it. In this manner may the S8un's longitude, or - in the ecſiptie, be found for any time. 52. In consequence of the obliquity of the ecliptic, md the Sun's umequal motion in ĩt, the natural days, or the interval between two successive passages of the Sun over the meridian, are unequal; and if a elock, vhich measures 365. 5 48 500 in a tropical year, be compared from day to day vith an exact sun dial, they will be found 16 diſfer, and will agree only four times in the year. This difference is called the EQUATON of TI©E, and sometimes amounts tI6 minutess The time shewn by the clock is cãlled NEAN sOLAR TIME, and that shewn by the dial i is called TRUE TiMæ and APPARENT TIME. 53. The change in the Suns motion is accompaniẽã by a change in his apparent diameten, which, at the beginning of January, is about 39 89', and at. the beginning oſ July is about 81' 84, 5 less. This must be àseribed to a change oſ distance, which must alvays bo supposed i inversely proportionalto the apparent diameter. 54. By combining the observations of the suns place in the ecliptic with those of his distance, inferred from the apparent diameter, and' by other more decisive, but Iess obvtious observations, Kepler, a German astronomer, ſound that his apparent path rond the earth is an ellipse, having the earth in one focus, and hãving the longer axis to the shorter axis as 200,000 to 199,972. The extremities A and P of the longer æxis of the suns orbit ABP D (Fig. 9) are called the a?PsivES. The point A, where the sun is farthest from the earſh (placed in E), is called the higher apsis, or APQGEE. P is the low-  er upsis, or. PERIGEE. The distanee E C betveen the ſoeus and centre is called the æccENTRICITY, and is 1650 parts oſ a scale, of which the mean distance E D is 160,00055. Xepler observed, that the sun's angular motion in this orbit was inversely proportional ſo the square of his distance from the earth; for he observed the sun's daily Vdb change of place to be as the square of his apparent diameter. Hence, he inferred that the radius vector EB described areas proportional to the times. 56. From this he deduced a method of calculating the sun's place ſor any given timee Drav a line E F from the focus of the ellipse, which shall cut off a seetor AEF, having the same proportion to the whole surſace of the ellipse, which the interval of time between the sun's last passage through his apogee, and the time for which the computation is made, has to a sydereal year; F will be the suns true place for that time. This is called XEPLER'S PROBLEM. This problem, the most interesting to astronomers, has not yet been solved otherwise than by approximation, or by geometrical constructions which do not admit of accurate computation. UV5T. Let ABPD (Fię ” be the elliptical orbit, having the earth.in the focus EE A and P, the extremities oſ the transverse axis, are the apogee and perogee of the revolving body. IB D is the conjugate axis, and C the centre It is required to drav a line ET which shall cut off a sector AET, which has to the whole ellipse the proportion oſ m to n; m heing taken to n in the proportion of the time elapsed since the hbody was in A to the time oſ a complete revolution. Kepler, vho was ũn excellent geometer, saw that this would be efſected, if he could draw a line E I, which should cut off from the circumseribed circle A b P d the aren A E I, which is to the whole circle in the same proportion of m to n. For, then, draving the perpendicular ordinate IR, cutting the ellipse.in T, he knew that the area AET has the same proportion to the ellipse that AE I has to the circlee The prooſ of this is easy, and it seems greatly to simpliſy the problem: Draw I C through the centre, and make ES perpendicular to ICS. The area AE I consists of the cireular sector A CI, and th triangle CIE. The sector is equal to halſ the rectangle . llIl; of ihe radius C I and the areh A, that is, to àX IA. The triangle CIE is equal to CL-ES, ,, CAPS. Thereſore it is evident that, if ve make the arch IM equal to the straight line ES, the sector ACM ill be equal to the cireular area A CJ, and the angle A CM vill be to 360 degrees, as m to n. 58. Hence we see, that it will be easy to find the time vwhen the revolving body is in any point T. To ſind this, draw the ordinate RT I;. drav I CS and E S, and make IM æE S. Then, 8509 is to the arch AM as the time of a revolution to the time in which thè body moves over AT. This is (in the astronomical language) finding the mean anomaly hen the true anomaly is given. The angle A CM, proportional 0 the time, is called the MEAN ANOMALY, and the angle A E Iis the TRUE ANoMALY. The angle A CIis called the ANOMALY OF THE ECCENTRIC, Or the ECCENTRIC ANOMALY. ] 59. But the astronomer wants the true anomaly corresponding to a given mean anomaly. The process here given cannot be reversedc We cannot tell how much to cut off from the given mean anomaly AM, so as to leave AI of a proper magnitude, because the indispensable measure of M I, namcly ES, cannot be had till ICS he drawn. Kepler saw this, and said that his problem could not be mlved geometrically. Since the invention of fluxions, however, and of converging serieses, very accurate solutions have been obtainedc That given by Frisius in his Cosmographia is the same in principle with all the most approved methods, and the-form in which it is presented iĩs peculiarly simple and neatt. But, except for the construetion of original tables, these methods are rarely employed, on aceount oſ the laborious caleulation which they require. Of all the direet approximate solutions, that given by Dr Matthew Stewart at the end oſ his Tracts, Physical and Mathęmatical, published ©n IT6I, sccms the most accurate - Now it is plain, from the construetion, that Si iCiĩ =SE: iQ, = MO: i Q, m Mbi M O: i . Thereſore SiXi Im Ci X Mbi —mCi x MO. But Ci xM bi is equal to twice the seetor M Ci, and Ci x M O is equal io twice the triangle M C i. Thereſore, 8ĩi xi I is equal to twice the segment contained hetween M b i and the chiord M i. Therefore this segment is equal to the triangle i S I, or to the triangle i E I. Therefore the space Ci IE C is equal to the sector i CM, and the sector AEI to the sector A CM. The calculation founded on this construetion is extremely simple. In the triangle M OE, the sides M C and CE are given, with the included angle M CE; and the angles CE M, CME are sought. Moreover, AE is the sum of the given sides, and P E ĩs their difference, and ACM is the sum of the angles M and E. Therefore AE: E P=tan. ; and thus æ and Iã or their equals, A ẽi i and M Ci, are obtained. In the next place, in the triangle i CE, the sides i C, CE, and the included angle i CE, are given, and the angle E i C is soughtt. We have in the same manner as before, A Cĩ equal to the sum of the angles E and. i, and therefore AE: E Pæ tan. Thus the angle EiC, orits equal, 7CQ is obtained, and then, the arch ir=Dæ ſt& tan. i C Q ilti D n 5 MCĩ In the very eccentric orbits of the comets, ihis brings us vastly nearer to the truth than any of the indirect methods we know does by the first step. So near, indeed, that the common method, by the rule of.false position, may now he saſely employed. If the point, I, has been accurately found, it is plain, that if to the areh AI we add ES, that is, E C X sin. AC I, we obtain the arch AM with which ve began. But if I has not heen accurately determined, AM » vill differ from the primitive AM. Therefore, make Some small change on A I, and again compute AM. This will probably be again erroneous Then ãpply the rule oſ ſalse position as usua. The error remaining aſter the first step oſ Dr Stewarts process is always so moderate, that the variations of AM are very nearly proportional to the variations of AI; so that two steps oſ the rule vill generally bring the calculation within two or three seconds of the truth. The astronomical student vill find many beautiſul and important propositions in these mathematical tracts. The proposition just now employed is in page 398, &e. 61. Astronomers have discovered, that the line AP moves slowly round E to the eastward, changing its place about 25 56 in a century This makes the time oſ a complete revolution in the orbit to be 365 6 15 20. This time is called the ANOMALISTIC YEAB. Qf the proper Motions of the Moon. 62. Of all the celestial motions, the most obvious are those of the Moonn. We see her shift her situation among the stars about her own breadth to the eastward in an hour, and in somewhat less than a month she makes a complete tour oſ the heavenss The gentle beauty of her appearance during the quiet hours oſ a serene night, has attracted the notice, and ve may say the affections of all mankind; and she is justly styled the Queen of Heaven. The remarkable and distinet changes of her appearance have aſforded to all simple nations a most convenient index and measure oſ time, both ſor recording past events, and for ninking any ſuture appointments for business. Accordingly, we find, in the first histories oſ all nations, that the lunar motions were the first studied, and, in some degree, understood. It seems to have been in subserviency to this study alone that the other appearances of the starry heavens vere attended to; and the relative positions of the stars seem to have interested us, merely as the means oſ ascertaining the motions of the Moon. For we find all the zodiacs of the ancient oriental nations divided, not into 18 equal portions, corresponding to the Sun's progress during the period of seasons, but nto 27 parts, corresponding to the Moon's daily progress, and these are expressly called the nousES or MANsIONS of the Moon. This is the distribution of the zodiac of the ancient Hindoos, the Persians, the Chinese, and even the Chaldeans. Some have no division into 12, and those who have, do not give names to 12 groups of stars, but to 27. They first describe the situation oſ a planet in one of these mansions by name, noting its distance from some stars in that group, and thence infer in what part of which twelfth of the circumſerence it is placed. The division into 12 parts is merely mathematical, for the purpose of caleulation. In all probability, thereſore, this was an aſter-thought, the contrivance of a more cultivated age, well acquainted with the heavens as an object of sight, and beginning to extend the attention to speculations beyond the first conveniences of life 63. When the Moon's path through this series oſ mansions is carefully observed, ĩt js found to be (very nearly) a great cirele of the heavèns, and therefore i in a plane passing through the centre oſ the earth. 64. She makes a complete revolution of the heavens i in 2q T 48 1, but vith some variationss Her mean daily motion is thereſore I8 10 25, and her horary motion is 32 56. ] G5. Her orbit is inclined to the plane of the ecliptic in an angle of 5 8 45', nearly, cutting it in two points called her NoDES, diametrically opposite to each other; and that node through which she passes in coming ſfrom the south to the north side oſ the ecliptic, is called the AscEæDING NODE. 66. The nodes have a motion which is generally westvard, but vith considerable ſrregularities, making a complete revolution in about õ803 à' 55 1V, nearly 184 years 20 ASTRONOMICAL PHENOMENA. 6. If 'we mark on a celestial globe a series of poinis where the Moon was observed during three or four revolutions, and then lap a tape round the globe, covering thos points, we shall see that the tape crosses the ecligtic more westerly every turn, and then crosses the last round very obliquely; and we see that by continning this operation, we shall completely cover with the tape a zone oſ the heavens, about ten or èleven degrees broad, having the ecliptic rumming along its middle. 68. The Moon moves unequally in this orbit, her hourlymotion increasing ſrom 29 84 to 86 4V, and the equation of the orbit sometimes amounts to & I8 82; so that if, setting out from the point where her horary motion is slowest, we calculate her place, for the eighth day thereaſter, at the rate of 3 56 per hour, we shall find her observed place short of our calculation more than half a days motion. And ve should have found her as much beſore it, had ve begun our calculation from the opposite point of her orhit. 69. Her apparent diameter changes from 1 2.b/j to 38 4, and thereſore her distance from the Earth changes. This distance may be discovered in mile- by meuns oſ her parallax. She was observed, in her passage over the meridian, by two astronomers, one of whom vas at Berlin, and the other at the Cape of Good. Hope. These two places are distant from one another above 5000 miles; so that the observer aut Berlin sav the Moon every day considerably more to the south than the person at the Cape. This diſference of apparent declination is the measure of the angle D; 5C i Fig. 6.) subtended at the Moon by the line c I òf miles, between the observerss. The angles S De and S oD i ure given by means of the Moon's observed altitudes. Thereſore any of the sides S D or S c may be computed. It is found to be nearly 60 semidiameters of the earth. 0. By combining the observations of the Moon's place in the heavens with those oſ her apparent diameter, we dis- cover that her orbit is nearlj an ellipse, having the Earth in one foeus, and having the longer axis to the shorter axis. nearly as 9l to 89. The greatest and least distances are neatly in the proportion of 2I to 19° , 71. Her motion in this ellipse is such, that the line joining the Earth and Moon deseribes areas which are nearly pProportional to the timess For her angular hourly motion is observed to be as the square oſ her apparent diameter. 72. The line of the apsides has a slow motion eastward, completing a revolution in about 8259 I1 I4' 80, nearly 9 yemrs. 73. While the Moon is thus making a sevolution; round the heavens, her appearance undergoes great changes. Bhe is sometimes on our meridian at midnight, and,, therefore,  the part of the heavens which is opposite to the Sum. In this situation, she is a complete Juminous citele, and is said to be ?'LE. As she moves eastward, she hecomes ũeficient on the west side, and, after about 7) days, comes to the meridian about six in the morning, having the appearance oſ a semicircle, with the eonvex side next the Sun. In this state, her appearancè is called HAL? zoox. Moving still eãstward, she becomes more deficient on ſhe est side, and has now the form of a erescent, vith the convex : side turned towards the Sun. This,crescęnt. hbecomes continually more slender, till, about I4 days aſter being full, she is so near the Sun; that she eannot be sten on ageonnt  of his great splendour. About four days aſter ſſis dina]-  pearance in the mornng before sunrise, she is seen in' the evening, aſittle to the eastward of the Sun, in the form of vith the convex side turned towarũs the  MoVing still to the chstward, the crescent becomes ful; and when the Moòn comes to the meridian six in the evening, she hãs again the appearanee of a bright semicircle. Advancing still to the eastward; she. becomes ſuller on the east side, and at last, 4fter about 29 days, she is again opposite to the Sun, and again full. 74. It ſrequently happens, that the Moon is ECLIPSED when full; and that the Sun iĩs eclipsed some time between the disappearance oſ the Moon in the morning on the west side oſ the Sun, and her reappearance in the evening on the east side of the Sun. This eclipse of the Sun happens at the very time that the Moon, in the course oſf her revolution, passes that part of the heavens where the Sun is. 75. From these observations we conclude, I. That the Moon is an opaque body, visible only by means of the Sun's light illuminating her surface; 2. That her orbit round the Earth is nearer than the Sun's. 76. From these principles all her PpHASES, or appearances, may be explained (Fig. 10.) 7. When the Moon comes to the meridian at mid-day, she is said to be NEW, and to be in coNFuNCTION with the Suni. When she comes to the meridian at midnight, she is said to be in oPPoBI?ION. The line joining these two situations is called the line of the sYZiIGiEs. The points where she is halfſ-illuminated are called the QuADRATURES; and that is called the first quadrature vhich happens aſter new Moon. 78 When the Moon is halſf illuminated, the line EM Fig. 10.) joining the Earth and Moon, is perpendicular to Ahe line M S, joining,the Moon and Sun. By observing the angle SE M, the proportion of the distance of the Sun to the distanee of the Moon may he ascertained. This method of ascertaining the Suns distance was proposed by Aristarehus oſ Samos, about 264 years before the Christian era The thought was extremely ingenious, and strietly just; and this was the first chservation that. gave the astronomers any confident guess at the very g great ũ tance of the Sun. But it is impossible to judge of ?ie halſillumination of the Moon's disk with suſficient aceuracy ſor obtaining any tolerable measuree Even now, when assisted by telescopes, ve cannot tell to a few minutes when the boundary between light and darkness in the Moon is ex- actly a straight line. When this really happens, the elongation SEM wants but & of a right angle, anũ when it is altogether a right angle, there is no sensible change in the appearance of the Moon. All that the ancient astronomers could infer, from the best estimation of the biseetion of the Moon, was, that the Sun was, for certain, at a much greater distance than any person had supposed beſore that time. Aristarchus said, that the angle S EM was not less than 87 degrees, and therefore the Sun was at least twenty times farther off than the Moon. But astronomers oſ the Alexandrian school said, that the angle S EM exceeded 59, and the Sun was sixty times more remote than the Moon. Modern observations shew him to be near four hundred times more remote. 79. This suggestion oſ phases is completed in a period of 2 I2 40 3, called a syNODICAL MONTH and a LuNATION. It may he asked here, how the period oſ a lunation comes to differ from that of the Moons revolution round the Earth, which is accomplished in 27 T 48 1? This is owing to the Sun's change of place during a revolution oſ the Moon. Suppose it new Moon, and therefore the Sun and Moon appearing in the same place of the heavens. At the end of the lunar period, the Moon is again in that point of the heavens. But the Sun, in the mean time, has advanced above 27 degrees; and somewhat more than two days must elapse before the Moon can overtake the Sun, s0 as to be seen by us as nev Moon. 50. The period of this succession of phases may be found within a few hours oſ the truth in a very short time. We can tell, within ſour or five hours, the ſime of the Moon being half-illuminated. Suppose this observed in the morning of her last quarte. We shall see this twice repeated m 59 days, hich gives ꝗ 190 for a lunation, wanting about three-fourths of an hour of the truth About 483 years beſore the Christiun era, Meton, a Greel astronomer reported to the states assembled at the õlym pic games ſhat in nineteen years ihere happened exactly 285 lunations. 81. The lunar motions are subject to several irregularities, of which the following are Ahe chief: 82. I. The periodic month is greater #hen the Sun iĩs in perigee than when in apogee, the greatest difference being about 24 minutes. Tycho Brahc ſirst remarked this anonaly of the lunar motions, and called the correetion (depending on the Sun's place in his orbit) the anxuat. ævarN oſ the Moon. : 8B3. æ. The mean period is less than it was in ancient times. 84. 8. The orbit is : larges vhen the Sun is in perigee n when he is in apogee. . 85. 4. The orbit is more eccentric when the Sun is in the line of the lunar apsides; and the equation of the orbit is then increased nearlyI0 084. This change is called the ævECTION. It was discõvered hy Ptolemy. 86. 5. The inclination of the òrbit changes, 87. 6. The Moons motion is retarded in the first and third quarters, and accelerated in the second and last. This anomaly vas discovered by Tycho Brahb, who calls iĩt the vaRIATION.. : 88. 7. The motion of the nodes is very unequal. OF the Folendor. iL . a; 89. Retronomy, like all other sciences, was ſirst practised as an art. The chieſ object of this art was to know the seasons, which, as we have seen, depend either immediately, or more remotely, on the Sun's notion in the ecliptic. A ready method for knowing the Season seems, in all ages, to have been the chief incitement to the study oſ astronomy. This must direct the labours oſ the field, the migrations of the shepherd, and the journies oſ the traveller. THE RALENDARm 31 It is equally necessary for appointing all public meetings, and for recording events. Were the stars visible in the day-time, it oula be easy 1o mark all the portions of the year by the Sun's placæ smong ther. When he is on the ſoot of Castor, it is midsuimmer; aud nſdvinter, when he is on the bow of Sagittarius. But this cannot be donè, hecause his splendour eelips: them all. 90. The best approximation vhich a rude people ean make to this, is to mark the days in which the stars of the mdiac come first in sight in the mor©iing, in the eastern horizon, immediately before the Sun rise As he graduully travels eastward along the ecliptie, the brighter stars which rise about three quarters of an hour heſore the Sun, may be seen in successionn. The hushandman and the shepherd were thus warned of the succeeding tasks by the appearance of certain stars before the Sun. Thus, in Egypt, the day, was proclaimed in which the Dogstar was first seen by those set to watch. The inhabitants immediately began to gather home their wandering ſlocks and herds, and prepare. themsclves ſor the inundation of the Nile in twelve or fourteen days Hence that star was called the Watch-dog, Tunorn, the Guardian of Egypt. This was therefore a natural commencement of the period of seasons in Egypt; and the interval between the successive apparitions of Thoth, has been called the NATURAL year of that country, to distinguish it ſrom the civil orartificial year, by which all records were kept, but  stich had little or no alliance with the seasons. It has also been ealled the Canicular year. It evidently depends on the Sun's situation and distance from the Dog.star, and must thereſore have the same period with the Sum's revolution from a star to the tame star againn. This requires 365 & 117, and differs from our period of seasons. Hence we must conclude, that the rising of the Dog-star is not an infallible presage oſ the inundation, but will be vã a : ASTRONOMICAL PHENOMENA. found faulty aſter a long course of ages. At present it happens about the I2th or Ilth of July. This observation of a star's first appearance in the year, by getting out of the dazzling blaze of the Sun, is called the heliacal rising of the sta. The ancient almanacks ſor directing the rural labours were obliged to give the detail of these in succession, and of the corresponding labourss. Hesiod, the oldest poet of the Greeks, has given a very minute detail of those heliacal risings, ornamented by a pleasing description of the successive occupations of rural life. This evidently required a very considerable knowledge of the starry heavens, and oſ the chief circumstances of diurnal motion, and particularly the number of days intervening between the first appearance of the different constellations. Such an almanack, however, cannot be expected, exeept among a somevhat cultivated people, as it requires a long continued observation of the revolution of the heavens in order to form it; and it must, even among such people, be uncertain. Cloudy, or even hazy veather, may prevent us for a fortnight from seeing the stars we want. 91. The Moon comes most opportunely to the aid of simple nations, for giving the inhabitants an easy division and measure of time. The changes in her appearance are 830 remarkable, and so distinet, that they cannot be confounded. Accordingly, we find that all nations have made use of the lunar phases to reckon by, and for appointing all public meetings. The festivals and sacred ceremonies of simple nations were not all dictated by superstition; but they served to fix those divisions of time in the memory, and thus gave a comprehensive notion of the year. All these festivals were celebrated at particular phases oſ the Moon—qgenerally at new and full Moon. Men were appointed to watch her first appearance in the evening, aſter having been seen in the morning, rising a few minutes before the Sun. Phis was done in consecrated groves, and in high places; and her appearance was proclaimed E4 5 i l ANCIENT KALENDAES. 33 Fourteen days aſter, the ſestival was generally held dur ing full Moon. Hence it is that the first day of a Roman month was named xALENDæ, the day io be procluimed. They said pridie, tertio, quarto, &e. ante culendas neomenias Martias; the third, fourth, &. before proclaiming the new Moon of March. And the assemblage oſ months, with the arrangement of all the festivals and sacrifioœs, was called a ALENDARIUM. As superstition overran all rude nations, no meeting was held vithout sacrifices and other religious ceremonies —ithe vatching and proclaiming vas naturally committed to the priest/the kalendar became a sacred thing, connected vith the worship of the godsand, long before any moderate knowledge of the celestial motions had heen acquired, every day of every Moon had its particular sanctity, and its appropriated ceremonies, which could not be transferred to any other. 92. But as yet there seemed no precise distinetion oſ months, nor of vhat number of months should be assembled into one group. Most nations seem to have observed that, aſter 12 Moons were completed, the season was pretty much the same as at the beginning. This was probably thought exact enough. Accordingly, in most ancient nations, we find a year of 854 days. But a ſew returns of the winter's cold, when they expeoted heat, would shew that this conjecture was far from heing correet; and now began the embarrassment. There was no diſficulty in determining the period of the seasons exactly enough, by means of very obvious observations. Almost any cottager has observed that, on the approach of vwinter, the Sun rises more to the right hand, and sets more to the leſt every day, the places of his rising and setting coming continually nearer to each other; and that, aſter rising ſor two or three days from behind the same object, the places of rising and setting again gradually separate from each other. BY such ſamiliar observations, the experience oſ an ordinary liſe Vou. III. C - suſficient ſor determining the period of the seasons with abundant accuracy. The diſficulty vas to accomplish the reconciliation of this period with the sacred cycle oſ months, each day oſ which was consecrated to a particular deity, jealous of his honours. Thus the Hierophantie science, and the whole art of kalendas-making, were necessarily entrusted to the priestss. We see this in the history oſ all nations, Jews, Pagans, and Christians. 93. Various have been the contrivances oſ diſferent nationss. The Egyptians, and some of the neighbouring Orientals, seem early to have known that the period of seasons considerably exceeded I2 months, and contained 365 days. They made the civil year consist of 12 months of 30 days, and added 5 complimentary days without ceremonies; and vhen more experience convinced them that the year contained a ſraction of a day more, they made no change, but made the people believe that it was an improvement on their kalendar, that their great day, the first of Thoth, by falling back one day in four periods of seasons, would thus occupy in succession every day of the year, and thus sanetiſy the whole in 1461 years, as they imagined, but really in 1425 of their civil yearss We have but a very imperfect knowledge of the arrangement of their festivals. Indeed they were totally diſferent in almost every city. . It is important to the astronomer to know this method oſ reckoning; because all the observations oſ Hipparchus and Ptolemy, and all those which they have quoted from the Chaldeans, Persians, &c. are-recorded by it. In An. Dom. 940, the ſirst day of Thoth fell on the first of January, and another Egyptian year commenced on the Slst of December of that year. From this datum it is easy to reckon back by years of 365 days, and to say on what day of what month of any of our years the first day of Thoth falls, and this wandering year commences. 92. The Greeks have been much more puzazled with the ſormation oſ a lunisolar year than the Egyptians. Solon got an oracle to direet his Athenians (504 years before our æra), tuii nuru rqx, nævæ Hxu, nuræ Zirũm, æ.i ura huigæs. The meaning of which seems to be, to regulate their year hy the Sun, or seasons, their months by the Moon, and their ſestivals by the days. Observing that 5 days made two months, he made these alternately of 30 and of 29 days, æu and æ.o., full, and deficient; and the 30th day of a month, the 7uæ⸗ vas called im ææ: na, nounmna, as it belonged to both months. But this was not suſfficiently aceurate; and the Olympic games, celebrated on every fourth year, during the full Moon nearest to midsummer day, had gone into great eonſusion. The Hierophants, hose proclamation to all the states assemhled the chieſs together, had not skill enough to keep them from gradually falling into the autumn months. Injudicious corrections were made from time to time, by rules for inserting months to bring things to rights again. It deserves to be remarked here, that this is the way in which the ancient astronomy improved, before the establishment oſ the Alexandrian school. It was not by a more accurate observation of the motions, as in modern times, but by discovering the errors, vhen they amounted to an unit of the scale on which they were measuredl. The astronomers then improved their future computations by repeatedly cutting off this unit oſ accumulated error. 95. All these contrivances were publicly proposed at the meeting oſ the States for the Olympic Games. This was an occasion peculiarly proper, and here the scheme of Meton was received with just applausee For Meton not only gave his countrymen a very exact determination oſ the Iunar month, but accompanied it with a scheme of intercalation, by which all their festivals, religious and civil, were arranged so as to have very small dislocations from the days of new and full Moon. As this had hitherto been a matter of insuperable diſiculty, Meton was declared vietor in the ſirst department, a statue was decreed him, and his arrangement of the festivals was inscribed on a pillar of marble, in letters of gold. This has occasioned the number expressing the current year of the cycle of 19 years (called the Metonic cycle) to be called the Golden Number. This scheme of Meton's vas indeed very judicious, though intricate, because he arranged the interpolation of a month 80 as never to remove the first day of the month two days from the time oſf new Moon, whereas it had often been a veek. The Metonic cycle commenced on 16th July, 438 years before the beginning of the Christian æra, at 43 minutes past seven in the morning, that heing the time of new Moon. The first year of each cycle is that in which the full Moon of its first month is the nearest to the summer solstice. 96. The Roman kalendar was in a much worse condition than the rudest of the Greeks. The superstitious veneration for their ceremonies, or their passion for public sports, had diverted the attention of the Romans (Who never were cultivators or graziers) from the seasons altogether. They were contented with a year oſ ten months for several centuries, and had the most absurd contrivances for producing some conformity with the seasons. At last, that accomplished general, Julius Cæsar, having attained the height of his vast ambition, resolved to reform the Roman kalendar. He was profoundly skilled in astronomy, and had written some dissertations on different branches oſ the science, which had great reputation, but are now lost. He had no superstitious or religious qualms to disturb him, and was determined to make every thing yield to the great purpose of a kalendar, its use in directing the occupations of the people, and for recording the events oſ history. He took the help of Sosigenes, an astronomer of the Alexandrian school, a man perfectly acquainted vith all the dis- coveries of Hipparchus and others oſ that celebrated academy. These eminent scholars, knowing that the period of seasons occupied 365 days and a quarter very nearly, made a short cycle of 4 years, containing three years of 365, and one of 366 days; thus cutting off, in the Grecian manner, the error, when it amounted to a whole day. Cæsar resolved also to change the beginning of the year from March, vwhere Romulus had placed it in honour of his patron Mars, to the vinter solstice. This is certainly the most natural way of estimating the commencement of the year of seasons. What we are most anxious to ascertain is the precise day vhen the Sun, after having withdrawn his cheering beams, and exposed us to the uncomſortable eold and storms of vinter, begins to turn toward us, and o bring back the pleasures of spring, and by his genial warmth to give us the hopes of another season of productive fertility. Cæsar therefore chose for the beginning of his kalendar, a year in which there vas a new Moon following close upon the winter solsticee This opportunity was aſforded him in the second year of his dictatorship, and the 707th year from the foundation of Rome. He found that there would be a new Moon six days aſter the winter solstico. He made this new Moon the Ist of January of his first year. But, to do this, he was obliged to keep the preceding year dragging on 90 days longer than usual, containing 444 days, instead of the old number 354. As all these days were unprovided vith solemnities, the year preceding Cæsars calendar was called ſhe year of confusion. Cæsar also, for a particular reason, chose to make his first year consist of 366 days, and he inserted the intercalary day between the 23d and 2th of February, choosing that particular day, as a separation of the lustrations and other piaculums to the infernal deities, which ended with the 238d, from the worship oſ the celes tial deities, which took place on the 24th of February. Th 2uth was the sextus ante kalendas neomenias Martias. Hi inserted day, answering civil purposes alone, had no ceremonies, nor any name appropriated to it, and vas to be considered merely as a supernumerary sextus unte alendas. Hence the year which had this intercalation was styled an annus bissextilis, a bissextile yea. With respect to the rest of the year, Cæsar heing also Pontiſex Maximus (an office of vast political importance), or rather, having all the power of the state in his own person, ordered that attention should be given to the days of the month only, and that the religious ſestivals alone should be regulated by the sacred college? He assigned to each month the number oſ days which has been continued in them ever since. 97. Such is the simple calendar of Julius Cæsar. Simple however as it was, his instructions were misunderstood, or not attended to, during the horrors of the civil warss Instead of intercalating every ſourth year, the intercalation vas thrice made on every succeeding third year. The mistake vas discovered by Augustus, and corrected in the best manner possible, by omitting three intercalations during the next twelve years. Since that time, the kalendar has been continued without interruption over all Europe till 1582. The years, consisting of 365} days, were called dulian years; and it was ordered, by an edict of Augustus, that this kalendar shall be used through the whole empire, and that the years shall be reckoned by the reigns of the diſferent emperors. This ediet was but imperfectly executed in the distant provinces, vhere the native princes vere allowed to hold a vassal sovereignty. In Egypt partieularly, although the court obeyed the edict, the people followed their former kalendars and epochs. Ptolemy the astronomer retains the reckoning of Hipparchus, by Egyptian years, reckoned ſrom the death of Alexander the Greatt. We must understand all these modes of computation, in order to make use of the ancient astronomical observations. A comparison of the diſferent epochs will be given as ve ſinish the subject. 98. The era adopted by the Roman Empire when Christianity became the religion of the state, was not ſinally settled till a good while aſter Constantinee. Dionysius Exiguus, a French monk, aſter consulting all proper documents, considers the 25th of December oſ the forty-fifih year of Julius Cæsar as the day oſ our Saviours nativity. The lst of January of the forty-sixth year oſ Cæsar is thereſore the beginning of the era now used by the Christian world. Any event happening in this year is dated anno Domini primo. As Cæsar had made his first year a bissextile, the year of the nativity was also bissextile; and the first year of our era begins the short eycle of four years, so that the fourth year of our era is bissextile. That ve may connect this era with all the others empPloyed by astronomers or historians, it will be enough to know that this ſirst year of the Christian era is the 47l4th of the Julian period It coincides with the fourth year of the 194th Olympiad till midsummer. It coincides with the 753d ab urbe condita, till April 2lst. It coincides with the 748th oſ Nubonassar till August 281. It coincides with the 324th civil year of Egypt, reckoned ſrom the death of Alexander the Great. In the arrangement of epochs in the astronomical tables, the years before the Christian era are eounted backwards, calling the year of the nativity O, the preceding year 1, &e. But chronologists more frequently reckon the year of the nativity the first before Christ. Thus, Years of Cæsar.. ..... 41, 42, 48, 44, 45, 46, 47, as, 49 Astronomers......... 4, 3, 2, 1, O, 1, 2, 8, 4 Chronologists.......... 5, 4, 8, 2, 1, 1, 2, 3, 4 This kalendar oſ Julius Cæsar has maniſest advantages n respect oſ simplicity, and in a short time supplanted all others among the western nationss Many other nations had perceived that the year of seasons contained more than 865 days, but had not fallen on easy methods oſ making the correction. It is a very remarkable fact, that the Mexicans, vhen discovered by the Spaniards, employed a cycele which supposed that the year contained 365 days. For, at the end oſ fifty-two years, they add thirteen days, which is equivalent to adding one every ſourth year. In their hieroglyphical annals, their years are grouped into parcels oſ four, each of which has a particular mark. 99. But although the Julian construction of the civil yenr greatly excelled all that had gone before, it was not perſeet, because it contained IT 143 more than the period of seasons. This, in 128 years, amounts exactly to a day. In 1582, it amounted to 12 7. The equinoxes and solstices no longer happened on those days of the month that were intended for them. The celebration of the church ſestivals was altogether deranged. For it must now he remarked, that there occurred the same embarrassment on account of the lunar months, as formerly in the Pagan vorld. The Council oſ Nice had decreed that the great festival, Easter, should be celebrated in conformity with the Jewish passover, which was regulated by the new Moon following the vernal equinox. All the principal ſestivals are regulated by Easter Sunday But by the deviation of the Julian kalendar from the seasons, and the words oſ the decree oſ the Nicene Council, the celebration of Easter lost all connexion with the Passover. For the decree did not say, The ſirst Sunday after the full Moon following the vernal equinox, but the first Sunday aſter the full Moon following the 2lst of March It frequently happened that Easter and the Passover vere six weeks apart. This was corrected by Pope Gregory the XIII. in 1582, by bringing the 2lst oſ Mareh to the equinox again. He ſirst eut off the ten days which had accumulated since the Council of Nice; and, to prevent this accumulation, he 5 directed the interealation oſ a bissextile to he omitted on every centurial year. But the error of a Julian century containing 36525 days, is not a whole day, but 18 40'. Therefore the correction introduces an error of 5 20. To prevent this from accumulating, the omission of the eenturial intercalation is limited to the centuries not divisible by four. Therefore 1600, 2000, 2400, &e. are still bissextile years; but 1700, I800, 1900, 2100, 2200, &e. are common years; There still remains an error, amounting to a day in 144 centuries. The kalendar is now suſficiently accurate for all purposes of history and record, and even for astronomy, because the tropical year of seasons is subject to a periodical inequality. 100. A correction, much more accurate than the Gregorian, occurred to Omar, a Persian astronomer at the court of Prince Gelala Eddin Melek Schah. Omar proposed always to delay to the thirty- third year, the interealation which should have been made in the thirty-second. This is equivalent to omitting the Julian interealation altogether on the 128th year. This method is extremely simple, and serupulously accurat:. For the error of II' I5' of the Julian year amounts precisely to a day in 128 years. It differs from the truth only one minute in 120 years. This correction took place in A. D. 1079, at the same time that the Arab Alhazen was reforming the science of astronomy in Spain. The Gregorian calendar, however, has less chance of being ſorgotten or mistaken. Centurial years are remarkable, and call the attention, even by the unusual sound of the wordss. The thirty. second year has nothing remarkable, and may be overlooked. I0l. It now appears that certain attentions are necessary for avoiding mistakes, vhen we would appeal to very distant observations We must know the accurate interval, however large. Although one hundred Julian years eontain 36,525 days, ve must keep in mind, that betweer 1500 and IGO0 ten days are wanting; and that each of the centuries 1700 and 1800 also want a dav. The interval from the beginning oſ our era, and A. D. 1552, needs no attention; but that between 1505 and 1805 wants twelve days of three Julian centuries. 102. We must also be careful, in using the ancient observations, to connect the years of our Lord vith the years before Christ in a proper manner. An eclipse mentioned by an astronomer as having happened on the Ist of February, anno 8tio A. C. must be considered as happening in the forty-second year of Julius Cæsar. But iſ the same thing is mentioned by a historian or chronologist, it is much more probahle that it was in the ſorty-third year oſ Cmsar. It was chieſly to prevent all ambiguities of this kind that Scaliger contrived what he called the Julian period. This is a number made by multiplying together the numbers called the Lunar, or Metonic qycle, the solar cycle, and the indiction. The lunar cycle is 19, and the first year of our Lord was the second of this cycle The solar cycle is 28, being the number of years in which the days of the month retum to the same days of the week. As the year contains ſifty-two weeks and one day, the first day of the year (or any day of any month) falls back in the week one day every year, till interrupted by the intercalation in a bissextile year. This makes it fall back two days in that year; and therefore it will not return to the same day till aſter four times seven, or twenty-eight yearss The first year of our Lord was the tenth of this cyclee The NbniCTION is a cycle of fifteen years, at the beginning of which a tax vas levied over the Roman empire. It took placè A. D. 812; and if reckoned backward, it would have begun three years before the Christian era. The year oſ this cycle, for any year of the Christian era, ill thereſore be had by adding three to the year, and dividing by fſiſteen. The produet of these three numbers is 7980: and it is plain, that this number of years must elapse hefore a year can have the same place in all the three eycles. If, thereſore, ve know the place oſ these eycles, belonging to any year, we can tell what year it is of the Julian peThe first year oſ our era was the second oſ the lunar cycle, the tenth oſf the solar, and the fourth of indietion, and the 47l4th of the Julian periodc By this we may arrange all the remarkable eras as follos: J.P. 98 I. AC. Era of the Olympiais........ 3988 IS 5 8 u5,TI6 Foundation oſ Rome...... 3961 IS8 9 I Y5,M58 Nabonassar.................. 3967 I9 I- T1ua6,141 Death of Alexander....... 4390 8238,324 First of Julius Cæsar..... 4660 21 I4 4 44, 45 A. Dom. I.................. 4714 I0 2 4 103. Did the Metonic eycle of the Moon correspond exactly with our year, it would mark for any year the number of years which have elapsed since it was new Moon on the Ist of January. But its want oſ perfect accuracy, the vicinity of an intercalation, and the lunar equations, sometimes cause an error of two days. It is much used, however, ſfor ordinary calculations ſfor the Church holidays. To find the golden number, add one to the year of our Lord, divide the sum by 19, the remainder is the golden number. If there be no remainder, the golden number is I9. 104. Another number, called Epact, is also used ſor facilitating the caleulation of new and full Moon in a gros way. The epact is nearly the Moons age on the Ist of danuary. To find it, multiply the golden number by I1, add 19 to the producet, and divide by 30. The remainder is the epact. Enowing, by the epact, the Moon's age on the Ist of January, and the day of the year corresponding to any day oſ a month, it is easy to find the Moons age on that day, by dividing the double of the sum oſ this number and the epact by 59. The halſ remainder is nearly the Moons Although these rude computations do not correspond with the motions of the two luminaries, they deserve notice, being the methods employed by the rules of the church for settling the moveable church festivals. Of the proper Motions of the Planets. 105. The planets are observed to change their situations in the starry heavens, and move among the signs of the æodiac, never receding far from the ecliptic. Their motions are exceedingly irregular, as may be seen by Fig. 11, which represents the motion of the planet Jupiter, from the beginning of 1708 to the beginning of 1710. EX represents the ecliptic, and the initial letters of the months are put to those points of the apparent path where the planet was seen on the first day of each month. It appears that, on the Ist of January 1708, the planet was moving slowly eastward, and became stationary about the middle of the month, in the second degree of Libra. It then turned westward, gradually increasing its vesterly motion, till about the middle of March, when it was in opposition to the Sun, at R, all the while deviating farther from the ecliptic toward the north. It now slackened its westerly motion every day, and vas again stationary about the 20th of May, in the twenty-second degree of Virgo, and had come nearer to the ecliptio. Jupiter now moved eastward, nearly parallel to the ecliptic, gradually accelerating in his motion, till the beginning of October, when he was in conjunetion with the Sun at D, about the eleventh degree of Libra. He now slackened his progressive motion every day, till he was again stationary, in the second degree of Scorpio, on the I2th or 1th of February 1709. He then moved westward, vas again in opposition, in the twenty-seventh degree of Libra, about the middle of April He became stationary, about the end oſ June, in the twenty-first degree of Libra; and ſrom this place he again proceeded eastward; was in conjunction about the beginning of November, very near the star in the southern scale of Libra; and, on the Ist of January 1710, he vas in the twenty- fourth degree of Scorpio. This figure will very nearly correspond with the apparent motions of the planet in the same months of I803 and 1I804. Jupiter will go on in this manner, forming a loop in his path in every thirteenth month; and he is in opposition to the Sun, when in the middle oſ each loop. His regress in each loop is about IO degrees, and his progressive motion is continued about 40 degreess He gradually approaches the ecliptic, crosses it, deviates to the southward, then returns towards it; crosses it, about six years aſter his former crossing, and in about twelve years comes to where he was at the beginning of these observations. 106. The other planets, and particularly Venus and Mercury, are still more irregular in their apparent motions, and have but few circumstances of general resemblance. The first general remark which can be made on these intricate motions is, that a planet always appears largest vwhen in the points R, R, R, which are in the middle of its retrograde motions. Its diameter gradually diminishes, and becomes the least of all when in the points I', IV, D, which are in the middle oſ its direet motionss. Hence we infer, that the planet is nearest to the Earth when in the middle of its retrograde motion, and farthest from it when in the middle oſ its direet motion. It may also be remarked, that a planet is always in conjunction with the Sun, or comes to our meridian at noon, vwhen in the middle of its direet motions. The planets Venus and Mercury are also in conjunction with the Sun vhen in the middle of their retrograde motionss But the planets Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, are always in opposition to the Sun, or come to our meridian at midnight, 46 ASTRONOMICAT. PHENOMENA. vwhen in the middle oſ their retrograde motionss Their situations also, when stationary, are always similar, relative to the Sun. These appearances in all the planetary motions have therefore an evident relation to the Suns place. 107. The ancient astronomers were of opinion, that the perfection of nature required all motions to be uniform, as far as the purpose in view would permit. The planetary motions must thereſore be uniform, in a figure that is uniform; and the astronomers maintained, that the observed irregularities were only apparent. Their method for reconciling these with their principle of perfeetion is very obviously suggested by the representation here given of the motion of Jupiter They taught, that the planet moves uniſormly in the circumference of a cirele r s (Fig. 12) in a year, while the centre Q oſ this circle is carried uniformly round the Earth T, in the circumference of another circle QA L. The circle QA L is called the DEFERENT cmeLE, and ꝗr⸗ is called the EPICYCLE. They explained the deviation from the ecliptie, by saying, that the deferent and the epieycle vere in planes different from that of the ecliptie. By various trials of diſferent proportions of the deferent and the epicycle, they hit on such dimensions as produced the quantity of retrograde motion that was observed to be combined with the general progress in the order of the signs oſ the zodiacBut another inequality vas observed. The arch of the heavens intercepted between two successive oppositions oſ Jupiter (for example), was observed to be variable, being always less in a certain part oſ the zodiac, and gradually increasing to a maximum state in the opposite part of the zodiac. In order to correspond with this sECOND INEQUALITY, as itwas called, and yet not to imply any inequality of the motion of the epicycle in the circumference of the deferent circle, the astronomers placed the Earth not in, but at æ certain distance from, the centre oſ the deſerent; so that an equal arch between two succeeding oppositions should subtend a smaller angle, vhen it is on the other side oſ that centree Thus, the unequal motion of the epicycle was explained in the same way as the Sun's unequal motion in his annual orbitt. The line dravn through the Earth and the centre of the deſerent is called the line of the planet's ArsipES, and its extremities are called the apogee and perigee oſ the deferent as in the case oſ the Suns orbiv (54.) In this manner, they at last composed a set of motions which agreed tolerably well with observation. The celebrated geometer Apollonius gave very judicious directions how to proportion the epieycle to the deferent cirelee. But they seem not to have been attended to, even by Ptolemy; and the astronomers remained very ignorant of any method of construction which agreed sufficiently with the phenomena, till about the thirteenth century, when the doctrine of epicycles was cultivated with more care and skill. A very full and distinet account is given of all the ingenious contrivances of the ancient astronomers for explaining the irregularities of the celestial motions, in the first part of Dr Small's History of the Discoveries of Kepler, published in 1803. Of the Motions of Venus and Mercury. 108. Venus has been sometimes seen moving across the Suns disk from east to west, in the form oſ a round black spot, with an apparent diameter of about 59. A ſew days aſter this has been observed, Venus is seen in the morning, rising a little beſore the Sun, in the form of a fine crescent, vith the convexity turned toward the Sun. She moves gradually westward, separating from the Sun, with a retarded motion, and the crescent hecomes more ſul. In about ten veeks, she has moved 46 west oſ the Sun, and is now a semicirele, and her diameter is 67. She now separates no ſarther from the Sun, but moves eastward, with a motion gradually accelerated, and she gradually dimin/ ishes in apparent diameter. She overtakes the Sun, about 94 months after having been seen on his disk. Some time aſter, Venus is seen in the evening, east of the Sun, round, but very small. She moves eastward, and increases in apparent diameter, but loses of her roundness, till she gets about 46 east of the Sun, when she is again a semicircle, having the convexity toward the Sun. She now moves westward, increasing in diameter, but becoming a creseent, like the vaning Moon; and, at last, aſter a period oſ nearly 584 days, comes again into conjunction with the Sun, with an apparent diameter of 59. 109. From these phenomena ve conclude, that the Sun is included within the orbit oſ Venus, and is not ſar from its centre, while the Earth is without this orbitt. Therefore, while the Sun revolves round the Earth, Venus revolves round the Sun. The time of the revolution of Venus round the Sun may be deduced from the interval which elapses between two or more conjunctions, by help of the following theorem: 1I0. Let two bodies, A and B, revolve uniſormly in the same direction, and let a and b be their respeetive periods, oſf which b is the least, and ? the interval between two successive 2umsa or oppositions. Then 7/ ? ? and a=2L. For the angular motions are inversely proportional to the periodic times. Thereſore the angular motions of A and B are . and And, since they move in the same direction, the synodical or relative motion is the difſerence oſ their angular motionss. Therefore the ſun1 I damental equation is 5 acr Hence ;35 +2, a +1t1 ail I1 1—b at  ad b4944 Alsoc /75  T and a bi t—bt We may also calculate the synodical period ſ, vhen ve II know the real periods of each. For;57 ; ab a2Vv j This gives, for the periodic time of Venus round the Sun, 224 16 49 1. III. But it is evident, that if this angular motion is not uniform, the interval between two successive conjunctions may chance to give a false measure of the periodc But by observing many conjunctions in various parts oſ the heavens, and by dividing the interval between the first and last by the number of intervals between each (taking care that the first and last shall be nearly in the same part of the heavens), it is evident that the inequalities being distributed among them all, the quotient may be taken as nearly an exact medium. Hence arises the great value oſ ancient observations In eight years we have five conjunetions of Venus, and she is only I0 2' short of the place of the first conjunctionn. The period dedueed from the conjunctions in 1761 and 1769, scarcely differs from that deduced from the conjunctions in 1639 and 1761. But the other planets require more distant ohservations. 112. Venus does not move uniformly in her orbit. For if the place oſ Venus in the heavens be observed in a great number of successive conjunetions with the Sun (at which time her place in the ecliptiec, as seen from the Sun, is either the Suns place, as seen from the Earth, or the opposite to it), we find that her changes oſ place are not proportional to the elapsed times. By observations of this kind, ve learn the inequality of the angular motion of Venus round the Sun, and hence ean find the equations for every point oſ the orbit of Venus, and can thence deduce the position of Venus, as seen from the Sun, for any given mstant. This, however, requires more observations of this kinc than we are yet possessed of, because her conjunetion Vo. III D a.21D a bW and t happen so nearly in the same points of her orbit, that great part of it is left without observations of this kind But we have other observations oſ almost equal value, namely, those of her greatest elongations from the Sun. There is none of the planets, thereſore, of which the equations (which indeed are very small) are more accurately determined. 1I. We can now determine the form and position of the orbit. For we can observe the place of the Sun, or the position of the line ES, (Fig. I8) joining the Earth and Sun. We knov the length of this line (58.) We can observe the cEOCENTRIC place oſ Venus, or the position oſ the line E D joining the Earth and Venuss. And we can compute (112.) the HELIoCENTRIC place of Venus, or the position oſ the line S C joining Venus and the Sun. Venus must be in V, the intersection oſ these two lines; and thereſore that point of her orhit is determined. 114. By such observations Kepler discovered, that the orbit of Venus is an ellipse, having the Sun in one focus, the semitransverse axis being 7233, and the eccentricity 510, measured on a scale of which the Sun's mean distance from the Earth is I00000. 115. The upper apsis of the orbit is called the AruELIoN, and the lower apsis is called the PERIHELION Of Venus. 116. The line of the apsides has a slow motion easiward, at the rate of 2 44 46 in a century. 1I7. The orbit of Venus is inclined to the ecliptic at an angle of 3 20, and the nodes move westward about 1 n a year. 118. Venus moves in this orbit so as to deseribe round the Sun areas proportional to the times. 119. The planet Mercury resembles Venus in all the circumstanees of her apparent motion; and ve make similar inferences with respect to the real motions. His orbit is discovered to be an ellipse, having the Sun in one focus. The semitransverse uxis is 38710, and the eecentrieity T7960. The apsides move eastward I°57 20 in a century. The orbit is inelined to the ecliptic 7. The nodes move westward 45 in a year. The periodic time ĩ 876 23 15 37, and areas are described proportional to the times. Of the proper Motions of the Superior Planets. I20. Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, exhihit phenomena considerably different from those exhibited by Mercury and Venus. I. They come to our meridian both at noon and at midnight. When they come to our meridian at noon, and are in the eeliptic, they are never seen crossing the Suns disk. Hence ve infer, that their orbits inelude both the Sun and the Earth. 2. They are always retrograde when in opposition, and direct when in conjunetion. The planet Jupiter may serve as an example of the way in which their real motions may be investigated. 121. Jupiter is an opaque body, visible by means oſ the reflected light of the Sun. For the shadows of some of the heavenly bodies are sometimes observed on his disk, and his shadow frequently falls on them. 122. His apparent diameter, when in opposition, is about 467, and, when in conjunction, it is about 817, and his disk is always roundc. Hence ve infer, that he is nearest when in opposition, and that his least and greatest distance are nearly as two to three The Earth is, therefore, far removed from the centre of his motion; and, if wve endeavour to explain his motion by means of a deferent circle and an epicyele, the radius oſ the deferent must be about five times the radius of the epicycle. 123. Since Jupiter is always retrograde when in opposition, and direet vhen in conjunetion, his position, with respeet to the centre of his epicycle, must be similar to the position of the Sun with respect to the Earth. His motion, therefore, in the epicycle, has a dependance on the motion of the Sun; and his motion, as seen from the Sun, must be simpler than as seen ſrom the Earth. His position, as seen from the Sun, may be accurately observed in every opposition and conjunetion. It was very natural for the ancient astronomers of Greece to infer, ſrom what has been said just now, that the position of Jupiter, in respect of the centre of his epicycle, was the same as that of the Sun in respect of the Earth, not only in opposition and conjunction, but in every other situation. For, in twelve years, we see it to be so in the oppositions observed in twelve parts of the heavens, and in 83 years we see it in 76 parts. It is very improbable, therefore, that it should be otherwise in the intervals. The motion of a superior planet may be explained upon these principles in the following manner: Let T (Fig. 12) be the Earth, and æ à : 97  æ be the Sun's orbitt. Also, let A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, be the places of the centre of the epicyele in the circumference of the deferent when the Sun is in æ , æ à  9. 7 x. a, make A a parallel to T, and B) parallel to T ⸗ and C c parallel to T., &e. and make these lines of a length that is duly proportioned (by the Apollonian rule) to the radius TA of the deferent circle. When the Sun is in æ 8. . &e. the centre of the epieycle is in A, B, C, &e. and the planet is in a, b, c, &e. and the dotted curve a bc d ę fghak is its path in absolute space between two succeeding oppositions to the Sun, viz. in a, and in . 124. If wve make the radius of Jupiters deferent cirele to that oſ the epieycle, as 52 to 10, the epicyelical motion arising from this construetion will very nearly agree with the observation. Only we may observe, that the oppositions which succeed each other near the constellation Virgo, are less distant from one another than those observed in the opposite part of the heavens; so that the centre of the epicycle seems to move slower in the first case than in the last. To reconcile this with the perfect uniformity of the motion of that centre in the circumference of the deferent circle, the ancient astronomers said that the earth was not exactly in the centre of the deferent, but so placed that the equable motion of the centre of the epicycle appeared slower, because it is then more remote; and after various trials, they fixed on a degree of eccentricity for the deferent, which accorded better than any other with the observations, and really diſfered very little from them. Copernicus shews that their hypothesis for Jupiter never deviates more than half a degree ſrom observation, if it be properly employed. They found that the epicycle moved round the deferent in 4882; days, vith an equation gradually increasing to near 6 degrees; s0 that if the place of the epicycle be calculated for a quarter of a revolution from the apogee, at the mean rate of 5 per day, it will be found too far advanced by near ten weeks motion. 125. But the ancient astronomers had no such data for determining the absolute magnitude of the deferent cireles and epicycles for the superior planets, as Mercury and Venus afforded them. The rules given them by Apollonius only taught them what proportion the epicycle of each planet must have to its deferent cirele, but gave no information as to the absolute magnitude of either, or the proportion between the deſerent circles of any two superior planets. Accordingly, no two ancient astronomers agree in their measures, farther than in saying that Saturn is farther oſf than Jupiter, and Jupiter than Mars. This they inferred from their longer periodss. All they had to take care of vas to make their sizes suſficiently different, so that the epieycles of two neighbouring planets should not cross and justle each othe. Yet they might easily have come very near the truth, by a small and very allowable addition to their hypothesis of epicyclical motion, namely, by suppos l ing that the epicycle of each planet is equal to the Sun's orbit. This was quite allowable. 126. If ve do this, we shall deduce consequences that are very remarkable, and which would have put the ancient astronomy on a footing very near to perfection. For, if C c (Fig. 12.) be not only parallel to T., but also equal to it, then CT.c is a parallelogram, and .c is equal and parallel to TC. The bearing (to express it as a mariner) and distance of Jupiter from the Sun is at all times the same with the bearing and distance of the centre oſ his epicycle from the Earth; and Jupiter is always found in an orbit round the Sun, equal and similar to the deferent orhit round the Earth. Thus, æo is equal to TA; b to TB; æc to TC, &e. with respeet to all the points oſ the looped curve. If the Earth be in the centre of the deferent, the distance of Jupiter from the Sun is always the same, and he may be said to describe a cirele round the Sun, while the Sun moves round the Earth. Nay, it results from the equality of A a to Ta of Bb to T⸗ &e. that whatever eccentricity, or whatever ſorm it has been thought necessary to assign to the deſerent, the distances æ a, àb, æ c, &e. will still be respectively equal to TA, TB, TC, &e. The cirele which the astronomers called the deferent, because it is supposed to carry Jupiter's epicycle round the Earth, may be supposed to accompany the Sun, being carried round by him in a year, the line of its apsides (124.) keeping parallel to itself, that is, in our figure, to TA. And thus, the motion oſ Jupiter round the Sun will be ineomparably more simple than the looped curve round the Earth; for it will be precisely the motion which was given by the astronomers to the centre of Jupiter's epicyclee The motion of Jupiter in absolute space is indeed the same looped curve in both eases; but the way of conceiving it is much much more simple. 127. This supposition of the equality of Jupiters epieycle to the Sun's orbit, and the parallelism of Cc to T- n every position oſ Jupiter, are fully verified by the modern discoveries of his satellites These little planets revolve round him with perſect regularity, their shadows ſrequently ſall on his disk, and they are oſten obscured by his shadow. This shews the position of Jupiter's shadow at all times, and, consequently, Jupiter's position in respeet of the Sun. This we find at all times to be parallel to the supposed position of the centre of his epicycle Thus . c is found parallel to TC. I28. We now can tell the precise point in which Jupiter is found in any moment of time. Having made the radius Ta to the radius TA in the due proportion of IO to 52, and having placed the Earth at the proper distance from the centre of the deferent QA L, we can calculate (60.) the position and length of the line T. joining the Earth vith the Sun. We can draw the line TC to the supposed centre of Jupiter's epicycle, having learned the lav or equation oſ the supposed motion of that centre by our observation oppositions in all quarters of the ecliptic (124.) and ve then drav . V parallel to it. This must pass through Jupiter, or Jupiter must be somewhere in this lin. We observe Jupiter, however, in the direction TZ. dupiter must thereſore be in the intersection c oſ the lines V and TZ. And then we can measure c-, Jupiters distance from the Sun. 129. Kepler, by taking this method with a series oſ observations made by Tycho Brahè, discovered that Jupiter vas always ſfound in the circumſference of an ellipse, having the Sun in its focuss Its semitransverse axis is 520098, the mean distance oſ the Earth from the Sun heing supposed 100000. Its eccentricity is 25277. Its inclination to the ecliptic is 1° 20, and the nodes move eastward about I' in a year. I0. The revolution in this orbit is completed in 43323 days, and areas are described proportional to the times. 131. Proceeding in the same manner, we discover that the planets Mars, Saturn, and the one discovered by Dr Herschel in 1781, are always found in the cireumference of ellipses, with the Sun in one focus, and deseribe round him areas proportional to the times. The chief circumstances of their motions are stated as follows: Mean Distancee. Eccentricity. Period in Doys Georgian planet I908584 90788 80456,07 Satum --- 53941 58210 10759,27 Mars - --- 152369 14Q18 686,98 132. Two other bodies have lately been detected in the planetary regions, revolving round the Sun in orbits which do not seem very eccentric, and seem placed between those of Mars and Jupiter. The first vas observed in 1801 by Mr Piazzi of Palermo, and by him named Ceres. The other was discovered in 1802 by Mr Olbers of Bremen, who has called it Pallas. They are exceedingly small, and ve have seen too little of their motions as yet to enable us to state their elements with any precision.* 188. Thus it has been discovered, that, while the Sun revolves round the Earth, the six planets now mentioned are always found in the circumferences oſ ellipses, having the Sun in one ſocus, and that they describe round the Sun areas proportional to the times. 134. But now, instead of supposing that the centre of a small epicyle is carried round the circumſference of a greater deferent circle, difſerent ſor each planet, we may rather consider the Suns orbit round the Earth as the only deferent circle, and suppose that the planets describe their * The following are the chief circumstances of their motions; the mean distance of the Earth being 100, 000. Mean distance. Eccentricity. Period in Days. Pallass, - LT9I00 2u630 1703 17" Sider. Revol. Ceres, - U6500 . 8141 1681 I9 Tropical ditto. Juno, - - 265700 ?b/096 1588 Ditto. Vesta, - 237300 939—L 1155 Ditto. En. great elliptical epieyeles round him with diſferent periods, vhile he moves round the Earth in a yea. The real motions of the planets are still the same looped curves in hoth casess. For, in either case, the motion oſ a planet is compounded of the same motions. But the latter supposition is much more probablee We can scarcely conceive the motion of Jupiter in the epicycle ? rs as having any physical relation to its centre, a mere mathematical point of spac. We cannot consider this point as having any physical properties that shall influence the motions of the planet. This point also is supposed to be in motion, carrying vith ĩt the influence by which the planet is retained in the cireumference oſ the epicycle This is another inconceivable circumstancee This combination of circles, therefore, camot be considered as any thing but a mere mathematical hypothesis, to furnish some means of ealeulation, or for the delineation of the looped path of the planet. Accordingly, the first proposers of these epieycles, sensible of the mere nothingness of their centre, and the impossibility of a nothing moving in the circumſference of a cirele, and draving a planet along with it, farther supposed that the epicycles were vast solid transparent globes, and that the planet was a luminous point or star, sticking in the surface of this globe And, to complete the hypothesis, they supposed that the globe turned round its centre, carrying the planet round with it, and thus produced the direct and retrograde motions that we ohserve. Aristotle taught, that this motion was effected by the genius oſ the planet residing in the globe, and directing it, as the mind of man directs his motionss But, further, to account for the motion of this glohe in the circumference of the deferent, the ancient philosophers supposed, that the deferent was also a vast crystalline, or, at least, transparent material spherical shell, turning round the earth, and that this shell was of suſficient thickness to receive the epicyclic globe within its slid substance, not adhering, but at liberty to turn round its own centre This hypothesis, though more like the dream of a feverish man than the thoughts of one in his senses, was received as unquestionable, from the time of Aristotle till that of Copernicus. It is scarcely eredible, that thinking men should admit its truth ſor a minute, even in its most admissible form. But as the art of observing improved, it was found necessary to add another epicycle to the one alrendy admitted, in order to account ſor an annual inequality in the epicyclical motion. This was a small transparent globe, placed where Aristotle placed the planet, and the planet was stuck on its surfacee Even this was found insuſficient, and another set of epicycles were added, till, in short, the heavens were filled with solid matter. It is needless to say any more of this epicyclical doetrine and machinery. 185. But the other mode of conceiving the planetary motions, while it equally furnishes the means of calculation or graphical operation, has much more the appearance oſf reality. The Suns motion is round the Earth, which ve ure naturally disposed to think the centre oſ the world; and the planets revolve, not round a mathematical point, a nothing, but round the Sun, a real and very remarkable substance. 186. Xepler, to vhom ve are indebted for this discovery oſ the elliptical motions, and the equable description of areas, also observed, that the squares of the periodic times in these ellipses are proportional to the cubes oſ the mean distances ſrom the Sun. He also observed the same analogy vith respeet to the Suns period and distance from the Earth. 187. The distances here alluded to are all taken from a scale of equal parts, of which the Sun's mean distance from the Earth, contains 100000. But astronomers wish to know the absolute quantity of those distances in some known measuress This may be learned by means of the parallax of any one of the planetss. Thus, let Mars be in M, (Fig.14.) and let his distance from some fixed star C be observed by two persons on the surſace of the Earth at A and B. The difference G D of the observed distances CG, CD, will give the angle D MG, or its equal AM B. The angles M A B and M B A are given by observation, and the line A B is given; and thereſore AM, and consequently EM, may be' computed in miles. The transit of Venus across the Suns disk affords mueh better observations for this purposee For, at the time, Venus is much nearer to the Earth than Mars is when in opposition, their distances from us heing nearly as 28 52. Therefore the distance hetween the observers will subtend a larger angle at Venuss. This may be measured by the distance between the apparent tracks of Venus across the Sun's diskK A spectator in Lapland, for example, sees Venus move m the line CD, (Fig. 15) while one at the Cape of Good Hope sees her move in the line A B. Also, as C D is a shorter chord than A B, the transit will occupy less time. This difference in time, amounting, in some fortunate cases, to many minutes, will give a very exact measure of the interval hetween those two chords. 135. The transits in 1761 and 1769 were employed ſor this purpose, at the earnest recommendation of Ior Edmund Halley From those observations, combined vith the proportions deduced from Keplers third law, ve may assume the ſollowing distances from the Sun in English statute miles, as pretty near the truth. The Earth - - 93, 7126,900 Mercury - - - 6,281, 700 Venus - - - 67,795, 500 Mars- - - - 142,818, 000 Jupiter- - - 487,472, 000 Saturn - - - 894, 162, 000 Georgian Planet- -1,789,989,000 ' The following are the distances of the new planets, in miles: Miles. Miles. Pallas 265, 000,000 Juno -2⸗4,000,000 Ceres - 965, 000,000 Vesta - 295,000,000 En. Qr the Secondary Planets. 189. Jupiter is observed to be always accompanied by ſour small planets called sar'LLITES, which revolve round him, vhile he revolves round the Sun. Their distances from Jupiter are measured by means of their greatest elongations, and their periods are discovered by their eclipses, when they come into his shadow, and by other methodss. They are observed to deseribe ellipses, having Jupiter in one focus; and they deseribe areas round Jupiter, which are proportional to the times. Also the squares of their periods are in the proportion of the cubes of their mean distances from Jupiter. 140. It has been discovered, by means of the eclipses of Jupiter's satellites, that light is propagated in time, and employs about & 11 in moving along a line equal to the mean distance of the Earth from the Sun. The times of the revolutions of these little bodies had been studied vith the greatest care, on account of the easy and accurate means which their frequent eclipses gave us for ascertaining the longitudes of placess But it was found, that, aſter having ealculated the time of an eclipse in conformity to the periods, which had been most accurately determined, the eclipse happened later than the ealculation, in proportion as Jupiter was farther ſrom the Earth. If an eclipse, vhen Jupiter is in opposition, be observed to happen precisely at the time caleulated, an eclipse three months before, or after, when Jupiter is in quadrature, will be observed to happen about eight minutes later than the calculated time. An eclipse happening about six weeks beſore or aſter opposition, will be about four minutes later than the calculation, vhen those about the time of Jupiter's opposition happen at the exact time. In general, this retardation of the eclipses is observed to be exactly proportional to the increase of Jupiters distance from the Earth. It is the same with respect to all the satellites. This error greatly perplexed the astronomers, till the connexion of it with Jupiters change oſ distance was remarked by Mr Roemer, a Danish astronomer, in 1674. As soon as this gentleman took notice oſ this connexion, he concluded that the retardation of the eclipse was owing to the time employed by the light in coming to us. The satellite, now eelipsed, continued to be seen, till the last reſlected light reached us, and, when the stream of light ceased, the satellite disappeared, or was eclipsed. When it has passed through the shadow, and is again illuminated, it is not seen at that instant by a speetator almost four hundred millions oſ miles oſfit does not reappear to him till the ſirst reſlected light reaches him. It is not till about forty minutes aſter being re-illuminated by the Sun, that the first reflected light ſrom the satellite reaches the Earth when Jupiter is in quadrature, and about thirty-two minutes vhen he is in opposition. This ingenious inference of Mr Roemer was doubted for some time, but most of the eminent philosophers agreed with him. It became more probable, as the motions of the satellites were more accurately defined; and ĩt received complete confirmation by Dr Bradley discovering another, and very different consequence of the progressive motion of light from the fixed stars and planetss This will be considered afterwards; and, in the mean time, ĩt is evinced that light, or the cause of vision, is propagated in time, and requires about 163 minutes to move along the diameter of the Suns orbit, or about 8 11 to come from the Sun to us, moving about 200,000 miles in a second. Some imagine vision to be produced by the undulation of an elastic medium, as sound is produced by the undulation of air. Others imagine light to be emitted from the luminous body, as a stream of water from the disperser of a watering-pann. Whichever of these be the case, light now becomes a proper subjeet of mechanical discussion; and we may now speculate about its motions, and the forces which produce and regulate them. 141. Satumn is also observed to be accompanied by seven satellites, which cireulate round him in ellipses, having Saturn in the foous. They describe areas proportional to the times, and the squares oſ the periodic times are proportional to the cubes of their mean distances. 142. Besides this numerous band of satellites, Saturn is also aceompanied by a vast arch or ring of coherent matter, which surrounds him, at a great distance. Its diameter is about 208,000 miles, and its breadth about 40,000. It is ſlat, and extremely thin: and as it shines only by refleeting the Sun's light, ve do not see it when its edge is turned towards us Late observation has shewn it to be two rings, in the same plane, and almost united. But that they are separated, is demonstrated by a star being seen through the interval between them. Its plane makes an angle of 29° or 30° with that oſ Saturn's orbit; and when Saturn is in IT° 200, or 5 200, the plane of the ring passes through the Sun, and reflects no light to us. 148. In 1787, Dr Herschel discovered two satellites attending the Georgian planet; and in 1798, he discovered ſour more. Their distances and their periodie times observe the laws oſ Kepler; but the position of their orbits is peculiarly interesting. Instead of revolving in the order oſ the signs, in planes not deviating far from the ecliptic, their orbits are almost, if not precisely perpendicular to it; s0 that it cannot be said that they move either in the order oſ the signs, or in the opposite. 144. Thus do they present a new problem in physical astronomy, in order to ascertain the Sun's influence on their motion the intersection of their nodes, and the other disturbances of their motions round the planet. 145. They also shew the mistake of the cosmogonists, who would villingly aseribe the general tendency of the planetary motions from west to east along the ecliptie to 5 the influence of some general mechanical impulsion, instructing us how the world may be made as we see it. These perpendicular orbits are incompatible with the supposed influence. Of the Rotation of the Heavenly Bodies. 146. In I611, Scheiner, proſessor at Ingolstadt, observed spots on the disk of the Sun, whieh come into view on the eastern limb, move across his disk in parallel circles, disappear on the vestern limb, and, aſter some time, again appear on the eastern limb, and repeat the same motions. Hence it is inferred that the Sun revolves ſrom west to east in the space oſ 26 I4' I2, round an axis inclined to the plane of the ecliptic 7 degrees, and having the ascending node of his equator in longitude 2' 10. Philosophers have formed various opinions concerning the nature of these spotss. The most probable is, that the Sun consists oſ a dark nucleus, surrounded hy a luminous covering, and that the nucleus is sometimes laid bare in particular places. For the general appearance oſ a spot during its revolution is like Fig. 15. 147. A series oſ most interesting observations has been lately made by Dr Herschel, by the help oſ his great telescopes. These observations are recorded in the Philosophical Transactions for the years 1801 and 1502. They lead to very curious conclusions respecting the peculiar constitution of the Sun. It would seem that the Sun is immediately surrounded by an atmosphere, heavy and transparent, like our air. This reaches to the height of several thousand miless. On this atmosphere seems to float a stratum of shining clouds, also some thousands of miles in thickness. It is not clear, however, that this cloudy stratum shines by its native lightt. There is above iĩt, at some distanee, another stratum of matter, of most dazzling splendour. It would seem that it is this alone which illumi- nates the whole planetary system, and also the clouds below it. This resplendent stratum is not equally so, but most luminous in irregular lines or ridges, hich cover the whole disk like a very close brilliant network. Something of this appearance was noticed by Mr James Short, in 1748, while observing a total eclipse of the Sun, and is mentioned in the Philosophical Transactionss Some operation of nature in this solar atmosphere seems to produce an upward motion in it, like a blast, which causes both the clouds and the dazzling stratum to remove from the spot, making a sort oſf hole in the luminous strata, so that ve can see through them, down to the dark nucleus of the Sun. Dr Herschel has observed, that this change, and this denudation of the nucleus, is much more frequent in some particular places of the Sun's disk. He has also observed a small bit of shining eloud come in at one side of an opening, and, in a short time, move across it, and disappear on the other side of the opening; and he thinks that these moving clouds are considerably below the great cloudy stratum. 148. Dr Herschel is disposed to think, that the upper resplendent stratum never shines on the nucleus, not even when an opening has been made in the stratum of clouds. For he remarks, that the upper stratum is always much more driven aside by what produces the opening than the clouds are; so that even the most oblique rays from the splendid stratum do not go through, being intercepted by the border of clouds which immediately surround the opening. 149. From Dr Herschel's description of this wonderful object, we are almost led to believe that the surſace of the Sun may not be scorched with intolerable and destructive heat. It not unfrequently happens, that we have very cold weather in summer, when the sky is overcast with thick clouds, impenetrable by the direct rays oſ the Sun. The curious observations oſf Count Rumſord of the man- ner in which heat is most eopiously communicated through fluid substances, concur with vhat we knew before, to shew us, that even an intense heat, communieated by radiation to the upper surface of the shining clouds by the duæzling stratum above them, may never reach ſar down through their thickness With much more confidence may we aſfirm, that it would never warm the transparent atmosphere below those clouds, nor secoreh the firm surſace of the Sun. It is far from being improbable, therefore, that the surface may not be uninhabitable, even by creatures like ourselves. IF s0, there is presented to our view a scene oſ habitation 18,000 times bigger than the surface oſ this Earth, and about 50 times greater than those of all the planets added together. : 150. Similar observations, first made by Dr Hooke, in 1664, on spots in the disk oſ Jupiter, show that he revolves from west to east in  56, round an axis inelined to the plane oſ his orbit 20. It is also observed, that his equatoreal diameter is to his axis nearly as I4 to 18. 151. There are some remarkable circumstances in the rotation of this planett. The spots, by whose change of place on the disk we judge of the rotation, are not permanent, any more than those observed on the Sun's disk. We must therefore conelude, that either the surface of the planet is subject to very considerable variations oſ brightness, or that Jupiter is surrounded by a cloudy atmosphere. The last is, of itself, the most probable, and it becomes still more so from another cireumstancee There is a certain part of the planet that is sensibly brighter than the rest, and sometimes remarkably so. It is known to be one and the same part by its situation. This spot turns round in somevhat less time than the rest. That is, iſ a dark spot remains during several revolutions, it is found to have separated a little from this bright spot, to the leſt hand, that is, to the westward. There is a minute or two of diſferene: between the rotation of Jupiter, as deduced ſrom the sue Vor.. III. E cessive appearances of the bright spot, and that deduced from observations made on the others. I52. These circumstances lead us to imagine, that Jupiter is really covered vith a cloudy atmosphere, and that this has a slow motion from east to west relative to the surſace of the planett. The striped appearances, called Belts or Zones, are undoubtedly the efſect of a difference oſ elimate. They are disposed with a certain regularity, generally occupying a complete round oſ his surſacee Mr Schroeter, who has minutely studied their appearances ſor n long tract oſ time, and with excellent glasses, says, that the changes in the atmosphere are very anomalous, and often very sudden and extensive; in short,. there seems almost the same unsettled weather as on this globe. He does not imagine that we ever see the real surface oſf Jupiter; and even the bright spot which so firmly maintains its situation, is thought by Schroeter to be in the atmospheree. The general current of the clouds is ſrom east to vest, like our trade-winds, but they often move in other direetions. The motion is also frequently too rapid to be thought the transſerence of an individual substance; it more resembles the rapid propagation oſ some short-lived change in the state of the atmosphere, as we oſten observein a thunder storm. The axis of rotation is almost perpendicular to the plane of the orbit, so that the days and nights are always equal. 158. The rotation of Mars, first observed by Hooke and Cassini in 1666, is still more remarkable than that of Jupiter. The surſace of the planet is generally oſ unequal brightness, and something like a permanent figure may be observed in it, by which we guess at the time of the rotation. But the figure is so ill defined, and s0 subject to considerable changes, that it was long heſore astronomers could be certain oſ a rotation, so as to ascerta n the time. Dr Herschel has been at much pains to do this with accuracy, and, by comparing many successive apparitions oſ the same objects, he has ſound that the time of a revolution is 24 hours and 40 minutes, round an axis inclined to the plane of the ecliptic in an angle of nearly 6O degrees, but making an angle of 61 18 ith his own orbit. 154. It is midsummer-day in Mars when he is in long. II'I9 ſrom our vernal equinox. As the planet is oſ a very oblate form, and probably hollow, there may be a considerable precession oſ his equinoctial points, by a change in the direction of his axis. 155. Being so much inelined to the deliptic, the poles of Mars come into sight in the curse oſ a revolution. When either pole comes ſirst into view, it is observed to be remarkably brighter than the rest oſ the disk. This brightness gradually diminishes, and is generally altogether gOne, beſore this pole goes out of sight by the change of the planet's positionn. The other pole now comes into view, and exhibits similar appearances. I56. This appearance of Mars greatly resembles what our own globe will exhibit to a speetator placed on Venus or Mercury. The snows in the colder climates diminish during summer, and are renewed im the ensuing winter. The appearances in Mars may either be owing to snows, or to dense elouds, which condense on his circumpolar regions during his winter, and are dissipated in summer. Dr Herschel remarks, that the atmosphere of Mars extends to a very sensible distance from his disk. 157. Observers are not agreed as to the time oſ the rotation of Venus Some think that she turns round her axis in 23", and others make it 28 days and 5 hourss The uncertainty is owing to the very small time allowed for observation, Venus never being seen ſor more than three hours at a time, so that the change of appearance that we observe, day aſter day, may either be a part of a slow rotation, or more than a complete rotation made in a short time. Indeed no distinet spots have been observed in her disk since the time oſ the elder Cassini, about the middL of the seventeenth century. Dr Herschel has always observed her covered with an impenetrable cloud, as white as snow, and vithout any variety of appearance. 158. The Moon turns round her axis in the course of a periodic month, so that one face is always presented to our view. There is indeed a very small LiBRATION, as iĩt is called, by which we occasionally see a little variation, s that the spot which occupies the very centre of the disk, vwhen the Moon is in apogee and in perigee, shiſts a little to one side, and a little up or down. This arises from the perſect uniſormity of her rotation, and the unequal motion in her orbit. As the greatest equation of her orbital motion amounts to little more than 50, this causes the central spot to shiſt about ſ, of her diameter to one side, and, returning again to the centre, to shiſt as far to the other side. She turns always the same ſace to the other focus of her elliptical orbit round the Earth, because her angular motion round that point is almost perfectly equable. 159. It has been discovered by Dr Herschel, that Saturn turns round his axis in 10' 1I6, and that his ring turns round the same axis in 10 82. This axis is inclined to the ecliptic in an angle of 60 nearly, and the interseetion of the ring and ecliptic is in the line passing through long. 5 20° and II' 209 We see it very open vwhen Saturn is in long.  209, or  20; and its length is then double of its apparent breadth. It is then midsummer and midvinter on Saturn. When Saturn is in the line of its nodes, it disappears, because its plane passes through the Sun, and its edge is too thin to be visible It shines only by reflecting the Sun's light. For we sometimes see the shadow of Saturn on it, and sometimes its shadow on Saturn. It will be very open in 1811. Just now (1808) it is extremely slender, and it disappeared ſor a vhile in the month of June. Its diameter is above 200,000 miles, almost half of that of the Moons orbit und the Earth. 160. No rotation can be observed in Mereury, on account of his apparent minuteness, nor is any observed in the Georgian planet for the same reason. 161. Many philosophers have imagined, that the Earth revolves round its axis in 22' 56 4 from west to east; and that this is the cause oſf the observed diurnal motion of the heavens, which is thereſore only an appearance. It must be acknowledged, that the appearances will be the same, and that we must be insensible of the motion. There are also many cireumstances which render this rotation very probable. 162. 1. All the celestial motions will be rendered incomparably more moderate and simple. I the heavens really turn round the Earth in 28' 56' 4, the motion of the Sun, or of any of the planets, is swiſter than any motion of which we have any measure, and this to a degeee almost beyond conception. The motion of the Sun would be 20,000 times swifter than that of a cannon bal. That of the Georgian planet will be twenty times greater than this. If the Earth turns round its axis, the swiſtest motion necessary for the appearances is that of the Earths equator, vhich does not exceed that of a cannon hall. The motions also become incomparably simpler. For the combination of diurnal motion with the proper motion of the planets makes it vastly more complex, and impossible to account for on any mechanical principless This diurnal motion must vary, in all the planets, by their change of declination, being about } slower when they are near the tropics. Yet we cannot conceive that any physical relation can subsist between the orbital motion of a planet and the position of the Earts equator, suſficient for producing such a change in the planets motion. Be* The diurnal rotation of Mercury has been found to be performed n 2t' & 287. Juno is conjectured to revolve in about 27 hours. Ep. sides, the axis of diurnal revolution is far from being the same just now and in the time of Hipparchus. Just now, it passes near the star in the extremity oſ the tail oſ the Little Beat. When Hipparchus observed the heavens, it passed near the snout of the Camelopard. It is to the last degree improbable, that every object in the universe has changed its motion in this manmer. It must be supposed that all have changed their motions in diſferent degrees, yet all in a certain precise order, without any connexion or mutual dependance that we ean conceive. 163. à. There is no withholding the belief, that the Sun was intended to be a source of light and genial varmth to the organized beings vhich occupy the surface of our globee. How much more simply, easily, and beautifully, this is effeeted by the Earths rotation, and how much more agreeably to the known economy of nature! 164. 3. This rotation would he analogous to what ĩs observed in the Sun and most of the planets. 165. 4. We observe phenomena on our globe that are necessary consequences of rotation, but cammot be accounted for without itt. We know that the equatoreal regions are about tenty miles higher than the cireumpolar; yet the waters of the ocean do not quit this elevation, and retire and inundate the poless. This may be prevented by a proper degree oſ rotation. It may be so swiſt, that the waters would all flow toward the equator, and inundate the torrid zone; nay, so sviſt, that every thing loose would be thrown off, as we see the water dispersed from a twirled mop. Novw, a very simple calculation ill shew us, that a rotation in 23' 56 is precisely what will balance the tendency of the waters to flow from the elevated equator towards the poles, and will keep it uniformly spread over the whole spheroidc. We also observe, that a lump of matter of any kind weighs more (by a spring steelyard) at Spitzbergen than at Quito, and that the diminution of gravity is precisely what would arise from the supposed rotation, viZ. 215. There are arguments which give the most convincing demonstration of the Earth's rotation. 166. 1. Did the heavens turn round the Earth, as has long been believed, it is almost certain that no zodiacal fixed star could be seen by uss. For iĩt ĩs highly probable, that light ĩs an emission of matter from the luminous body. If this be the case, such is the distance of any fixed star A, (Fig. 16.) that, when its velocity AC is compounded vith the velocity oſ light emitted in any direetion A B, or Ab, it would produce a motion in a direetion AD, or Ad, which would never reach the Earth, or whieh might chance to reach it, but with a velocity infinitely below the known velocity oſ light; and, in any hypothesis concerning the nature oſ light, the velocity oſ the light by which we see the circumpolar stars, must greatly exceed that by which ve see the equatoreal stars. All this is contrary to observation. 2. The shadow of Jupiter, also, should deviate greatly ſrom the line dravn from the Sun to Jupiter, just as ve see a ship's vane deviate from the direction oſ the wind, when she is sailing briskly across that direction. If the diurnal revolution is a real motion, vhen Jupiter is in opposition, his first satellite must be seen to come ſrom behind his disk, and, after appearing for about I' 10, must be eclipsed. This is also contrary to observation; ſor the satellites are eclipsed precisely when they come into that line, whereas it should happen more than an hour aſter. 167. We must therefore conclude, that the Earth revolves round its axis ſrom vest to east in 2ò0 56 4. We must further conclude, from the agreement oſ the ancient and modern latitudes of places, that the axis oſ the Earth is the same as formerly; but that it changes itls psition, as we observe in a top whose motion is nearly spent. This change of position is seen by the shiſting oſ ſhe equinoctial pointss As these make a tour of the ecliptic in 2,97” years, the pole of the equator, keeping always per- pendicular to its plane, must deseribe a cirele round the pole of the ecliptic, distant from it 234 28', the inclination of the equator to the ecliptiec. It will be seen, in due time, that this motion of the Earths axis, which appeared a mystery even to Copernicus, Tycho Brahèé and Kepler, is a necessary consequence of the general power of nature by which the whole assemblage is held together; and the detection of this consequence is the most illustrious specimen of the sagacity of the discoverer, Sir Isanc Newton. Of the Solar System. 168. We have seen (I84.) that the planets are always found in the circumſerences of ellipses, which have the Sun in their common focus, while the Sun moves in an ellipse round the Earth. The motion of any planet is compounded of any motion which it has in respect of the Sun, and any motion which the Sun has in respect of the Earth. Therefore (9 98.) the appearances of the planetary motions will be the same as we have described, if we suppose the Sun to be at rest, and give the Earth a motion round the Sun, equal and opposite to what the Sun has been thought to have round the Earth. In the second part of that article sonssminꝶ relative motion, it was shewn that the relative motion, or change of motion, of the body B, as seen ſfrom A, is equal and opposite to that of A seen from B. In the present case, the distance of the Sun from the Earth is equal to that of the Earth from the Sun. The position or bearing is the opposite. When the Earth is in Aries or Taurus, the Sun will be seen in Libra or Scorpio. When the Earth is in the tropie of Capricorn, the Sun vill appear in that of Cancer, and her north pole will be turned towards the Sun; so that the northern hemisphere vill have longer days than nights. In short, the gradual variation of the seasons will be the same io both cases, if the Earth's axis keeps the same posi5 tion during its revolution round the Sun. It must do s, if there be no force to change its position;: and we see that the axis of the other planets retain their position. 169. Then, with respect to the planets, the appearances of direcet and retrograde motion, with points of station, ill also be the same as if the Sun revolved round the Earth. That this may be more evident, it must be observed, that our judgment oſ a planets situation is precisely similar to that of a mariner who sees a ships light in a dark night He sets it by the compass. If he sees it due north, and a few minutes aſter, sees it a little to the westward of north, he imagines that the ship has really gone a little westward, Yet this might have happened, had both been sailing due east, provided that the ship oſ the spectator had been sailing ſaster. It is just the same in the planetary motions. IF we give the Earth the motion that was ascribed to the Sum, the real velocity of the Earth will be more than double of the velocity of Jupiter Now suppose, according to the old hypothesis, the Earth at T (Fig. 12) and the Sun at . Suppose Jupiter in opposition. Then we must place the centre oſ his epicycle in A, and make A a equal to T.. Jupiter is in a, and his bearing and distance ſrom the Earth isT a, nearly 4-5ths of TA. Six weeks aſter, the Sun is in ⸗;5 the centre of Jupiters epicycle is in B. Drav B b equal and parallel to T⸗, and b is now the place of Jupiter, and Th is now his bearing and distancee He has changed his bearing to the right hand, or westward on the ecliptic; and his change of position is had by measuring the angle a Th. His longitude on the ecliptic is dimnished by this number of degrees. 170. Nov let the Sun be at T, according to the new hypothesis, and let A B E L be Jupiter's orbit round the Sun. Let Jupiter be in opposition to the Sun. We must place Jupiter in A, and the Earth in .. s0 as to have the Sun and Jupiter in opposition. It is evident that Jupiters bearing and distance from the Earth are the same as in the ſormer hypothesiss For A a being equal to. T we have : 4A, the distance of Jupiter from the Earth, equal to T a of the former hypothesis. Six weeks aſter, the Earth is at ?, and Jupiter at B. Jom  B, and drav , N parallel to TA. It is evident that the distance 2 B of Jupiter from the Earth, is equal to the distance Tb of the former construetion. Also the angle Nę B, which is Jupiter's change of bearing, (by the astronomers compass, the ecliptic), is equal to the angle  Tb of the former construetion. Jupiter therefore, instead of moving to the left hand, has moved to the right, or westward, and has diminished his ecliptical bearing or longitude by the degrees in the angle NB. 171. In the same manner may the apparent motion of Jupiter be ascertained for every situation oſ the Earth and dupiter; and it will be found that, in every case, the line corresponding to ? B is equal and parallel to the line corresponding to TH; thus  C is equal and parallel to Tc; æD is equal and parallel to T d, &e. The apparent motions of the planets are thereſore precisely the same in either hypothesis, so that we are left to follow either opinion, as it appears best supported by other arguments. 172. Accordingly, it has been the opinion of some philosophers, both in ancient and modern times, that the Earth is a planet, revolving round the Sun placed in the focus of its elliptical orbit, and that it is accompanied by the Moon, in the same manner as Jupiter and Saturn are by their satellites. The following are the reasons for preferring this opinion to that contained in the 133d and Iã5th articles, which equally explains all the phenomena hitherto mentioned, and is more consistent with our first judgments. I78. 1. The celestial motions become incomparably more simple, and free oſ those looped contortions which must e supposed in the other case, and which are extremely 7 - improbable, and incompatible with hat we know oſ the laws of motion. 174. 2. This opinion is also more reasonable, on account of the extreme minuteness of the Earth, when compared with the immense bulk of the Sun, Jupiter, and Satumn; and because the Sun is the source oſ light and heat to all the planets. The reasons adduced in this and the preceding article were all that could offer themselves to the philosophers of antiquity. They had not the telescope, and the satellites were therefore unknown. They had no knowledge oſ the Powers of nature by which the planetary motions are produced and regulated; their knowledge of dynamical science was extremely scanty. Yet Pythagoras, Philolaus, Apollonius, Anaxagoras, and others, maintained this opinion. But they had few ſollowers in an opinion so different from our habitual thoughts, and, for which they could only offer some reasons founded on certain notions of propriety or suĩtableness. But, as men became more conversant, in modern times, ith the meehanical arts, every thing connected with the motion oſ bodies became more familiar, and was better understood, and we had less hesitation in adopting sentiments unlike the first and most familiar suggestions of sense. Other arguments now offered themselves. 175. S. Iſ the Earth turns round the Sun, then the analogy between the squares oſ the periodic times and the cubes of the distances, will obtain in all the bodies which circulate round a common centre; whereas this will not be the ease with respect to the Sun and Moon, if both turmm round the Earth. 176. 4. Tt is thought that the motion of the Sun round the Earth is inconsistent with the discoveries which have been made concerning the forees which operate in the planetary motions. We have seen, by an article in dynamies, combined with the third law of motion, that neither can the Sun revolve round the Earth at rest, nor the Earth round the Sun at rest, but that both must revolve round their common centre of position. It is discovered that the quantity oſf matter in the Sun is more than 300,000 times that of the matter in the Earth. Therefore the centre of position of these two bodies must be almost in the centre of the Sun. Nay, if all the planets were on one side of the Sun, the common centre would be very near his centre. I7. But, perhaps, this argument is not oſ the great weight that is supposed. The discovery of the proportion of these quantities of matter seems to depend on its being previously established that the Sun is in, or near, the centre of position of the whole assemblage It must be owned, however, that the perfect harmony of all the comparative measures oſ the quantities of matter of the Sun and planets, deduced from sources independent of each other, renders their accuracy almost unquestionable. I78. 5. It is incontestably proved by observationn. A motion has been discovered in all the fixed stars, which arises from a combination of the motion of light with the motion of the Earth in its orbit. Suppose a shower of hail falling during a perfect calm, and therefore ſalling perpendicularly. Were it required to hold a long tube in such a position that a hailstone shall ſall through it without touching either side, it is plain that the tube must be held perpendicular Suppose now that the tube is fastened to the arm of a gin, such as those employed in raising coals from the pit, and that iĩt is carried round, vith a velocity that is equal to that of the falling hail. It is now evident that a perpendicular tube will not do. The hailstones will all strike on the hindmost side of the tube. The tube must be put into the direetion of the relative motion of the hailstoness Now, it was demonstrated that this is the diagonal of a parallelogram, one side of which is the real motion of the hail, and the other is equal, but opposite, to the motion of the tube. Therefore, iſ the tube be inelined forword, at an angle of 459, the experiment will succeed, because the tangent of this angle is equal to the radius; and, while the hailstone ſalls two feet, the tube advances two, and the hailstone will pass along the tube without touching it. In the very same manner, if the Earth be at rest, and we would view a star near the pole of the ecliptic, the telescope must be pointed directly at the star. But if the Earth be in motion round the Sun, the telescope must be pointed a little ſorward, that the light may come along the axis of the tubee. The proportion of the velocity of light to the supposed velocity oſ the Earth in its orbit is nearly that of 10,000 to I. Therefore the telescope must lean about 20forward. Halſ a year after this, let the same star be viewed again. The telescope must again be pointed 20 a-head of the true position oſ the star: but this is in the opposite direction to the former deviation of the telescope, because the Earth, being now in the opposite part of ĩts orbit, is moving the other vay Thereſore the position of the star must appear  have changed 40 in the six months. It is easy to shew that the consequence of this is, that every star must appear to have 40 more longitude when it is on our meridian at night, than when it is on the meridian at mid-day The efſfect of this composition oſ motions, vwhich is most susceptible of accurate examination, is the ſollowing. Let the declination of some star near the pole of the ecliptic be observed at the time of the equinoxes. It vill be found to have 40 more declination in the autumnal than in the vernal equinox, if the observer be in latitude 60 30; and not much less if he be in the latitude of London. Also every star in the heavens should appear to describe a little ellipse, whose longer axis is 40. 179. Now this is actually observed, and was discovered by Dr Bradley about the year 1726. It is called the ABER- RATION OF THE FIXED 5TARS, and is one oſ the most curious and most important discoveries of the eighteenth century. It is important, by furnishing an incontrovertible proof that the Earth is a planet, revolving, like the others, round the Sun. It is also important, by shewing that the light of the fixed stars moves with the same velocity with the light of the Sun, which illuminates our system. 180. This arrangement of the planets is called the CoPERNICAN 5YSTEM, having been revived and established by Copernicus, represented in Fig. AThe other opinion, mentioned (183), which equally explains the general phenomena, was maintained by Longomontanus. 181. Account of the PToLEMAIC, EGYPTIAN, and TrcuonC 8ystems (Fig. B, C, D.) 182. The Copernican system is now universally admitted; and it is fully established, I. That the planets and the comets describe round the Sun areas proportional to the times; and that the Moon, and the satellites oſ Jupiter and Saturn, deseribe round the Earth, Jupiter, and Saturn, areas proportional to the times. 2. That the orbits decribed by those bodies are ellipses, having the Sun, or the primary planet, in one focus. 3. That the squares of the periodic times of those bodies whieh revolve round a common centre are proportional to the cubes oſ their mean distances ſrom that centree These three propositions are called the LAWS or KEPLEE. I83. There is however an objection to this account of the planetary motions, which has been thought ſformidable. Suppose a telescope pointed in a direction perpendicular to the plane of the Earth's orbit, and carried round the Sun in this position. Its axis, produced to the starry firmament, should trace out a figure precisely equal and similar to the orbit, and we should be able to mark it among the stars round the pole of the ecliptic. But, if this be tried, we find that ve are alvays looking at the same point, which always remains the centre of the little ellipse which is the effect of the aberration of light. This ohjection was made, even in the schools of Greece, to Aristarchus o Samos, vhen he used his utmost endeavurs to bring into credit the later opinion of Pythagoras, placing the Sun in the centre of the system. And the answer given by Aristarchus is the only one that we can give at the present day. I54. The only answer that can be given to this is, that the distance of the fixed stars is so great, that a figure of near 200 millions of miles diameter is not a sensible object. This, incredible as it may seem, has nothing in it oſ absurdit. We know that their distance is immensee. The comet oſ 1680 goes 150 times farther from the Sun than we are, and ve must suppose it much farther from the nearest star, that it may not be affected by it in its motion round our Sun. Suppose it only twice as far, the Earths orbit traced among the stars ould appear only half the diameter of the Sun. We have telescopes which magniſy the diameter of objects 1200 times. Yet a ſixed star is not magniſied by them in the smallest degree. That ĩs, though we were only at the 1200dth part of our present distance from it, it would appear no bigger. The more perfect the telescope is, the stars appear the smaller. We need not he surprised, therefore, that observation shews no parallax oſ the fixed stars, not even I. Yet a parallax of I puts the ohject 206,000 times farther oſf than the Sun. But space is without bounds, and we have no reason to think that our view comprehends the whole creation. On the contrary, it is more probable that we see but an inconsiderable part of the scene on which the perfections of the Creator and Governor of the universe are displayed. Of the Comets. 185. There are sometimes seen in the heavens certain bodies, accompanied by a train of faint light, which has ocasioned them to be ecalled cometss. Their appearance and motions are extremely various; and the only general remarks that can be made on them are, that the train, or tail, is generally small on the first appearance of a comet, gradually lengthens as the comet comes into the neighbourhood of the Sun, and again diminishes as it retires to a distance. Also the tail is always extended in a direction nearly opposite to the Sun. 156. The opinions of philosophers concerning comets have been very diſſerent. Sir Isanc Newton first showed that they are a part oſ the solar system, revolving round the Sun in trajectories, nearly parabolical, having the Sun in the focuss. Dr Halley computed the motions of several comets, and, among them, found some which had precisely the same trajectory. He therefore concluded, that these were different appearances of one comet, and that the path of a comet is a very eccentric ellipse, having the Sun in one focus. The apparition of the comet of 1682 in 1759, which was predieted by Halley, has given his opinion the most complete confirmation. 187. Comets are thereſore planets, resembling the others in the laws oſ their motion, revolving round the Sun in ellipses, describing areas proportional to the times, and having the squares of their periodic times proportional to the cubes of their mean distances from the Sun. They differ from the planets in the great variety in the position of their orbits, and in this, that many of them have their course in antecedentia signorum. 185. Their number is very great; but there are but few with the elements of whose motions ve are vell acquaintedl. The comet of 1680 came very near to the Sun on the IIth of December, its distance not exceeding his semidiameter. When in its aphelion, it will be almost 150 times farther from the Sun than the Earth iss Our ideas of the extent of the solar system are thus greatly enlarged. 189. No satisſactory knowledge has been acquired concerning the cause of that train of light which accompanies the comets. Some philosophers imagine that it is the rarer atmosphere oſ the comet, impelled by the Suns rays. Others imagine, that it is the atmosphere of the comet, rising in the solar atmosphere by its specifie levity. Others imagine, that it is a phenomenon of the same kind vith the aurora borealis, and that this Earth would appear like a comet to a spectator placed on another planett. Consult Newton's Principia;a Dissertation, by Professor Hamilton of Trinity College, Dublin;a Dissertation by Mr Winthorpe of New Jersey, &e.; both in the Philosophical Transactions. Vou. III. F PHYSICAL ASTRONOMY 190. Ir is hoped, that the preceding account of the cœlestial phenomena has given the attentive student a distinet conception of the nature of that evidence which Kepler had for the truth of the three general facts discovered by him in all the motions, and for the truth of those seeming deviations from Keplers laws, which were so happily reconciled with them by Sir Isaac Newton, by shewing, that these deviations are examples of mutual deflections of the celestial bodies towards one another. Several phenomena were occasionally noticed, although not immediately subservient to this purpose These are the chieſ objects of our subsequent attempts to explainn. The account given of the kind of observation, by which the different motions were proved to be what has been afſirmed of them, has been exceedingly short and slight, on the presumption that the young astronomer ill study the celestial phenomenology in the detail, as delivered by Gregory, Keill, and other authors of reputation This study will terminate in the fullest conviction of the validity of the evidence for the truth of the Copernican system of the Sun and planets; and in a minute acquaintance with all those peculiarities of motion that distinguish the individuals of the magnificent assemblage. We are nov in a condition to investigate the particular characters oſ those extensive powers oſ nature, those mechanical affections of matter, vhich cause the observed deviations ſfrom that uniform reetilineal motion which would have been observed in every body, had it been under no mechanical influence And we shall also be able to explain or account for the distinguishing peculiarities oſ motion which characterize the individuals of the system, if ve shall so far succeed in our ſirst investigation, as to she w that no other force operates in the system, and that these peculiarities are only particular and accurately narrated cases of the three general laws, precisely conſormable to their legitimnte consequences. In our first investigation, ve must aſfirm the forces to be such as are indicated by the motions, in the manner agreed on in the general doctrines of Dynamies. That is, the kind and the intensity of the force must be inferred from the direction and the magnitude of the change which we consider as its effect. In all this process, it is plain, that we consider the heavenly hodies as consisting oſ matter that has the same mechanical properties with the bodies which are daily in our hands. We are not at liberty to imagine, that the celestial matter has any other properties than what is indicated by the motions, otherwise we have no explanation, and may as vell rest contented with the simple narration of the facts. The constant practic], in all attempts to explain a natural appearance, is to try to find a class of familiar phenomena vhich resemble it; and if we succeed, we account it to be one oſ the number, and we rest satisſied with this as a suſficient explanationn. Accordingly, this is the way that philosophers, both in ancient and modern times, have proceeded in their attempt to discover the causes of the planetary motions. 191. I. Nothing is more familiar to our experience than bodies carried round fixed centres by means of solid matter connecting the bodies with the centre, in one way or another. This was the first attempt to explain the planetary motions oſ which ve have any account. Eudoxus and Callippus, many ages beſore our era, taught, that all the stars in the firmament are s0 many lucid points or bodies, adhering to the inside of a vast material concave sphere, which turned round the Earth placed in the centre in twenty-four hours. It was called the CRYSTALLINE orB or Sphere. But this will not explain the easterly motion of the Sun and Moon, unless ve suppose them endowed with some self-moving power, by which they can creep slowly eastvard along the surface of the erystalline orb; far less will it account for the Moon sometimes hiding the Sun from us. These philosophers were therefſore obliged to say, that there were other spheres, or rather spherical shells, transparent, like vast glass globes, one within another, and all having a common centree The Sun and the Moon were supposed to be attached to the surface of those globes. The sphere which carried the Moon was the smallest, immediately surrounding the Earth. The sphere of the Sun was much larger, but still left a vast space between it and the sphere of the fixed stars, which contained all. This machinery may make a shiſt to earry round the Moon, the Sun, and the stars, in a way somewhat like what we behold. But the planets gave the philosophers much trouble, in order to explain their retrograde and direct motions, and stationary points, &e. To move Jupiter in a vay resembling what we behold, they supposed the shell of his sphere to be of vast thickness, and in its solid matter they lodged a small transparent sphere, in the surface of which Jupiter was fixed This sphere turned round in the hollow made for it in the thick shell of the deferent sphere, and, as all was transparent, exhibited Jupiter moving to the westward, when his episphere brought him toward us, and to the east, vhen it carried him round toward the outer surface of the deferent shel. Meanwhile, the great deferent globe was moving slowly eastward, or rather was turning more slowly westward, than the sphere of the stars. No doubt, this mechanism will produee round-about motions, and stations, and retrogradations, &c. This, however, is only a very gross outline oſ the planetary motions But the Suns unequable motion could not be represented without supposing the Earth out of the centre of rotation oſ his spheree. This was aceordingly supposed, and it was an easy supposition. But the motion of Jupiter, in relation to the centre of his epicycle, must be similar to the Sun's motion in relation o the Earth (123.); but a solid sphere, turning in a hollow which exactly ſits it, can only turn round its centre. This is evident. Therefore the inequality of Jupiter's epicyelical motion cannot be represented by this mechanism. The deferent sphere may be eccentrie, but the epicycle cannot. This obliged those engineers to give Jupiter a secondary epicycle much smaller than the epicyele which produced his retrogradations and stations. It moved in a hollow lodgement made for it in the solid matter of the epicyle, just as this moved in a hollow in the solid matter of the deferent globe. Even this would not correspond, vith tolerable exactness, with the observed tenor of Jupiter's motion; other epicycles were added, to tally with every improvement made on the equation of the apparent motion, till the whole space was almost crammed full oſ solid matter; and after all these efforts, some mathematicians affirmed, that there are motions in the heavens that are neither uniform nor cireular, nor can be compounded of such motions. If so, this spherical machinery is impossible. In modern times, Tycho Brahd proved, beyond all contradietion, that the comet of 1574 passed through all those spheres, and therefore their existence was a mere fiction. One should think the whole of this contrivance so artless and rude, that we wonder that it ever obtained the least credit; yet was it adopted by the prince oſ ancient philosophersby Aristotle; and his authority gave it possession of all the schools till modern times. But where, all this while, is the mover oſ all this machinery ? Aristotle taught, that each globe was condueted, or turned round its axis, by a peculiar genius or demon. This was worthy of the rest; and when suCh assertions are called eæplanations, nothing in nature need remain un- explained. We must, however, do Hipparchus and Ptolemy the justice to say, that they never adopted this hypothesis of Eudoxus and Callippus; they did not speculate about the causes, but only endeavoured to ascertain the motions; and their epicycle and deferent circles are given hy them merely as steps of mathematical contemplation, and in order to have some principle to direct their ealculation, just as we demonstrate the parabolic path of a cannon ball by compounding a uniform motion in the line of direction with a uniformly accelerated motion in the vertical linee. There is no such composition, but the motion oſ the ball is the same as if there were. 192. 2. A much more feasible attempt was made by Cleanthes, another philosopher of Greece, to assign the causes of the planetary motionss He observed, that bodies are easily carried round in whirlpools or vortices of water. He taught, that the celestial spaces are filled with an ethereal fluid, which is in continual motion round the Earth, and that it carried the Sun and planets round with it. But a slight examination of this specious hypothesis shewed, that it vas much more diſficult to form a notion of the vortices, so as to correspond with the observed motions, than to study the motions themselves. It thereſore gave no explanationn. Yet this very hypothesis was revived in modern times, and was maintained by two of the most eminent mathematicians and philosophers of Europe, namely, by Des Cartes and Leibnitz; and, for a long while, it was acquiesced in by all. We must constantly keep in mind, that an explanation always means to shew that the subject in question is an example of something that we clearly understand. Whatever is the avoved property oſ that more familiar subject, must therefore be admitted in the use made of it for explanation. We explain the splitting of glass by heat, by shewing, that the known and avowed effects of heat make the glass swell on one side to a certain degree, with a cer- tain known force; and we shew, that the tenacity oſ the other side of the glass, which is not swelled hy the heat, is not able to resist this force which is pulling it asunder; it must therefore give vay. In short, we shew the splitting to be one of the ordinary effeets of heat, which operates here as it operates in all other cases. Now, if we take this method, we find, that the effects of a vortex or vhirl in a fluid are totally unlike the planetary motions, and :hat we cannot aseribe them to the vortical motion of the ether, without giving it laws of motion un like every thing observed in all the fluids that we knov; nay, in contradiction oſ all those laws of mechanics which are admitted by the very patrons of the hypothesis To give this fluid properties unknown in all others, is absurd; we had better give those properties to the planets themselves. The ſact is, that these two philosophers had not taken the trouble to think about the matter, or to inquire what motions oſf a vortex of fluid are possible, and what are not, or vhat effects will be produced by such vortioes as are possiblee They had not thought of any means of moving the fluid itself, or for preserving it in motion; they contented themselves (at least this was the case with Des Cartes) with merely throwing out the general fact, that bodies may be carried round by a vortex. It is to Sir Isaac Newton that we are indebted for all that ve know of vortical motion. In examining this hypothesis of Des Cartes, which had supreme authority among the philosophers at that time, he found it necessary to inquire into the manner in which a vortex may be produced, and the constitution of the vortex which results ſfrom the mode of its produetion. This led him, by necessary steps, to discover what forms oſ vortical motion are possible, vhat are permanent, and the variations to which the others are subject. In the second book of his Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy, he has given the result of this examination; and it contains a beautiful system of mechani- cal doctrine; concerning the mutual action of the filaments of ſluid matter, by which they modify each other's motion. The result of the whole was a complete refutation of this hypothesis as an explanation of the planetary motions, shewing that the legitimate consequences of a vortical motion are altogether unlike the planetary motions, nay, are incompatible with them. It is quite enough, in this place, for proving the insufficiency of the hypothesis, to observe, that it must explain the motion of the comets as well as that of the planets. If Mars be carried round the Sun by a ſluid vortex, so is the comet which appeared in 1682 and 1759. This comet came from an immense distance, in the northern quarter of the heavens, into our neighbourhood, passing through the vortices oſ all the planets, describing its very eccentric ellipse with the most perfect regularity. Now, it is absolutely impossible, that, in one and the same place, there can be passing a stream of the vortex of a planet, and a stream of the cometary vortex, having a direction and a velocity so very different. It is inconceivable that these two streams of fluid shall have force enough, one of them to drag a planet along with it, and the other to drag a comet, and yet that the particles of the one stream shall not disturb the motion of those of the other in the smallest degree; even the infinitely rare vapour which formed the tail of the comet was not in the least deranged by the motion of the planetary vortices through which it passed. All this is inconceivable and absurd. It is a pity that the account given by Newton of vortical motions appeared on such an occasion; for this limited the attention of his readers to this particular employment of it, which purpose being completely answered in another way, this argument became unnecessary, and vas not looked into. But it contains much valuable information, of great service in all problems of hydraulics. Many consequences of the mutual action of the ſluid filaments produce impor- tant changes on the motion of the whole; so that till these are understood and taken into the account, we cannot give an answer to very simple, yet important questions. This is the cause why this branch of mechanical philosophy is in s0 imperſect a state, although it is one of the most important. 198. 8S. Many oſ the ancient philosophers, struck with the order, regularity, and harmonious co-operation of the planetary motions, imagined that they were condueted by intelligent mindss Aristotles vay of conceiving this has been already mentionedc The same doctrine has been revived; in some respeet, in modern times. Leibnit animates every particle oſ matter, when he gives his Monads a perception oſ their situation with respect to every other monad, and a motion in consequence of this pereeptionn. This, and the elemental mind ascribed by Lord Monboddo to every thing that begins motion, do not seem to differ much from the ir voxm of Aristotle; nor do they differ from what all the world distinguishes by the name of force. This doetrine cannmot be called a hypothesis; it is rather a definition, or a misnomer, giving the name Mind to what exhibits none of those phenomena by which we distinguish mind. No end beneficial to the agent is gained by the motion of the planet. It may be beneficial to its inhabitantDBut should ve think more highly of the mind of an animal vhen it is covered with vermin ?7Nor does this doctrine give the smallest explanation of the planetary motionss. We must explain the motions by studying them, in order to discover the laws by which the action of their cause is regulated: this is just the way that we learn the nature of any mechanieal forcee Accordingly, 194. 4. Many philosophers, both in ancient and modern times, imagined that the planets were deflected from uniform rectilineal motion by forces similar to what we observe in the motions oſ magnetical and electrical bodies, or ĩn the motion of common heavy bodies, where one body seems u l influence the motion of another at a distance ſrom it, without any intervening impulsion. It is thus that a stone is bent continually from the line of its direction towards the Earth. In the same manner, an iron hall, rolling along a level table, will be turned aside toward a magnet, and, by properly adjusting the distance and the velocity, the hall may be made to revolve round the pole of the magnet. Many of the ancients said that the curvilineal motions of the planets were produced by lendencies to one another, or to a common centree Among the moderns, Fermat is the first who said in precise terms that the weight oſ a body is the sum of the tendencies oſ each particle to every particle of the Earth. Kepler said still more expressly, that if there be supposed two bodies, placed out of the reach of all external forces, and at perfect liberty to move, they would approach each other, with velocities inversely proportional to their quantities of matter. The Moon (says he) and the Earth mutually attract each other, and are prevented from meeting by their revolution round their common centre oſ attraetionn. And he says that the tides of the ocean are the effects of the Moon's àttraction, heaping up the waters immediately under her. Then, adopting the opinion of our countryman, Dr Gilbert of Colchester, that the Earth is a great magnet, he explains how this mutual attraction will produce a deflection into a curvilineal path, and adds, c Veritatis in me fit amor an gloria, loquantur  dogmata mea, quæ pleraque ab aliis accepta fero. Totlam astronomiam Copernici hypothesibus de mundo, Tychonis  vero Brahei observationibus, denique Gulielmi Gilberti  Angli philosophiœ magneticœ inœdifico EPIT. ASTR. COPERN. 195. The most express surmise to this purpose is that of Dr Robert Hooke, one of the most ardent and ingenious students of nature in that busy period. At a meeting of the Royal Society, on May 8, 1666, he expressed himseli in the following manner. I will explain a system of the world very different from any yet received; and it is ſouniad on the three following positions.  I. That all the heavenly bodies have not only a gravitation of their parts to their ovn proper centre, but that they also mutually attract each other within their spheres of action.  2. That all bodies having a simple motion, vill eontinue to move in a straight line, unless continually deſleeted from it by some extraneous force, causing them to describe a circle, an ellipse, or some other curve.  S. That this attraction is s0 much the greater as the bodies are nearerr. As to the proportion in which those forces diminish by an increase of distance, I own (says  he) I have not discovered it, although I have made some  experiments to this purpose I leave this to others, who  have time and knowledge suſficient for the task. This is a very precise enunciation of a proper philosophical theory The phenomenon, the change of motion, is considered as the mark and measure of a changing force, and his audience is referred to experience for the nature of this ſorcee He had heſore this exhibited to the Society a very pretty experiment contrived on these principless A ball, suspended by a long thread from the ceiling, wvas made to swing round another ball laid on a table immediately below the point of suspension. When the push given to the pendulum was nicely adjusted to its deviation from the perpendicular, it described a perfect circle round the ball on the table But when the push was very great, or very small, it deseribed an ellipse, having the other ball in its centre Hooke shewed that this was the operation oſ a deflecting foree proportional to the distance ſrom another ball. He added, that although this illustrated the planetary motions in some degree, yet it was not suitable to their cause. For the planets describe ellipses having the Sun, not n the centre, but in the focuss. Therefore they are not retained by a force proportional to their distance ſrom the Sun. This was strict reasoning, from good principles. It is worthy of remark, that in this clear, and candid, and modest exposition of a rational theory, he anticipated the discoveries of Newton, as he anticipated, with equal dis tinctness and precision, the discoveries of Lavoisier, a philosopher inferior perhaps only to Newton. Thus we see that many had noticed certain points of resemblance between the celestial motions and the motions of magnets and heavy bodiess But these observers let the remark remain barren in their hands, because they had neither examined with sufficient attention the celestial motions, which they attempted to explain, nor had they formed to themselves any precise notions oſ the motions from which they hoped to derive an explanation. 196. At last a genius arose, fully qualified, both by talents and disposition, for those arduous tasks. I speak of Sir Isaac Newton. This ornament, this boast oſ our nature, had a most acute and penetrating mind, accompanied by the soundest judgment, vith a modest and proper diſfidence in his own understanding. He had a patience in investigation, which I believe is yet without an equal, and was convinced that this was the only compensation attainable for the imperfection of human understanding, and that when exercised in prosecuting the conjectures of a curious mind, it would not fail of giving him all the information that we are warranted to hope for. Although only 24 years oſ age, Mr Newton had already given the most illustrious specimen of his ability to promote the knowledge of nature, in his curious discoveries concerning light and colourss. These were the result of the most unwearied patience, in making experiments of the most delicate kind, and the most acute penetration in separating the resulting phenomena from each other, and the clearest and most precise logic in reasoning ſrom them; and they terminated in ſorming a body of science which gave a total change to all the notions of philosophers on this subject. Yet this body oſ optical science vas nothing but a fair narration of the facts presented to his viev. Not a single supposition or conjecture is to be ſound in it, nor reasoning on any thing not immediately before the eye; and all its science consisted in the judicious classification. This had brought to light certain general laws, vhich comprehended all the restt. Young Newton sav that this was sure ground, and that a theory, s0 ſounded, could never be shakenn. He was determined therefore to proceed in no other way in all his future speculations, vell knowing that the fair exhihition of a lav of nature is a discovery, and all the discovery to which our Iimited powers ill ever admit us. For he felt in its full force the importance of that maxim so warmly inculeated by Lord Bacon, that nothing is to be received as proved in the study of nature that is not logically inferred from an observed fact; that accurate observation of phenomena must precede all theory; and that the only admissible theory is a proof that the phenomena under consideration is included in some general fact, or lav of nature. 197. Retired to his country house, to escape the plague which then raged at Cambridge where he studied, and one day valking in his garden, his thoughts were turned to the causes of the planetary motions. A conjecture to this purpose occurred to himm Adhering to the Baconian maxim, he immediately compared it with the phenomena by caleulation. But he was misled by a false estimation he had made of the bulk of the Earth. His calculation shewed him that his conjecture did not agree with the phenomenon. Nevton gave it up without hesitation; yet the difference was only about a sixth or seventh part; and the conjecture, had it been confirmed by the calculation, was such as would have acquired him great celebrity. What youth but Newton could have resisted such a temptation? But he thought no more of it. As he admired Des Cartes as the first mathematician o Europe, and as his desire o understanding the planetary motions never quitted his mind, he set himself to examine, in his ovn strict manner, the Cartesian theory, which at this time was supreme in the universities of Europe. He discovered its nullity, but would never have published a reſutation, hating controversy above all things, and being alrendy made unhappy by the contests to which his optical discoveries had given occasion. His optical discoveries had recommended him to the Royal Society, and he was now a member. There he learned the accurate measurement of the Earth by Picard, diſfering very much from the estimation by which he had made his calculation in 16665 and he thought his conjecture now more likely to be just. He went home, took out his old papers, and resumed his caleulationss. As they drew to a close, he was so much agitated, that he was obliged to desire a ſriend to finish them. His former conjecture was now found to agree vith the phenomena vith the utmost precision. No wonder then that his mind was agitated. He saw the revolution he vas to make in the opinions of men, and that he was to stand at the head of philosophers. ] 198. Newton now saw a grand scene laid open before him; and he vas prepared for exploring it in the completest manner for, ere this time, he had invented a species oſ geometry that seemed precisely made for this research. Dr Hookes discourse to the Society, and his shewing that the pendulum was not a proper representation of the planetary forces, was a sort of challenge to him to find out that laW of defleetion vhich Hooke owned himselſ unable to discover. He therefore set himselſ seriously to work on the great problem, to è determine the motion of a body under c the continual influence of a deflecting foree? There were found among his papers many experiments on the force of magnets; but this does not seem to have detained him long. He began to consider the motions of terrestrial bodies with an attention that never had been bestowed on them before; and in a short time composed twelve propositions, which contained the leading points of celestial mechanism. Some years aſter, viæ. in 16883, he communicated them to the Royal Society, and they were entered on record. But little vas Newton disposed to court fame, that he never thought of publishing, till Dr Edmund Halley, the most eminent mathematician and philosopher in the kingdom, went to visit him at Cambridge, and never ceased importuning and entreating him, till he was prevailed on to bring his whole thoughts on the subject together, digested into a regular system of universal mechanis. Dr Halley was even obliged to correct the manuseript, to get the figures engraved, and, finally, to take charge of the printing and publication. Newton employed but eighteen months to compose this immortal work. It was published at last, in 1687, under the title of Mathematical Principles of Naturul Philosophy, and will be accounted the sacred oracles of natural philosophy as long as any knowledge remains in Europe. 199. It is plain, that in this process oſ investigation, in order to explain the planetary motions by means of our knovledge of motions that are more ſamiliar, Newton was obliged to suppose that the planets consist oſf common matter, in which we infer the nature oſf the moving cause from the motions that we observee Newton's first step, therefore, vas a scrupulous observation oſ the celestial motions, knowing that any mistake with regard to these must bring vith it a similar mistake with regard to the natural power inferred ſfrom it. Every force, and every degree oſ it, is merely a philosophical interpretation oſ some change of motion according to the Copernican system. The Earth is said to gravitate towards the Sun, because, and only hecause, she deseribes a curve line concave tovard the Sun, and areas proportional to the times. If this be not true, it is not true that the Earth gravitates to the Sun. For this reason, a doubt was expressed IT.), Whe ther the Newtonian discoveries were used vith propriety as arguments for the truth of the Copernican system. Most fortunately for science, the real motions of the heavenly bodies had been at last detected; and the sagacious Kepler had reduced them all to three general facts, known by the name of the laws of Kepler. 200. The first of those laws is, that all the planets move round the Sun in such a manner that the line drawn from a planet to the Sun passes over or describes (verrit, sveeps) areas proporlional to the times of the motion. Hence Newton made his ſirst and great inference, that the deflection of each planet is the action of a force always directed toward the Sun (19.), that is, such, that if the planet were stopped, and then let go, it would move toward the Sun in a straight line, with a motion continually accelerated, just as we observe a stone fall toward the Earth. Subsequent observation has shewn this observation to be much more extensive than Kepler had any notion of; for it comprehends above ninety comets, which have been accurately observedc A similar action or force is observed to conneet the Moon with this Earth, four satellites with Jupiter, seven with Saturn, and six with Herschel's planet, all of which deseribe round the central body areas proportional to the times. Newton ascribed all these defleetions to the action of a mechanical force, on the very same authority with which we ascribe the deflection of a bombshell, or of a stone, from the line of projection to its weight, which all mankind consider as a forcee. He thereſfore said that the primary planets are retained in their paths round the Sun, and the satellites in their paths round their respective primaries, by a force tending toward the central body. But it must be noticed that this expression ascertains nothing but the direction oſ this force, but gives no hint as to its manner of acting. It may be the impulse of a stream ofſ fluid moving toward that centre; or it may be the attraction oſ the central body. It may be a tendency inherent in the planetit may be the influence of some ministering spiritbut, whatever iĩt is, this is the direction of its effect. 201. Having made this great step, by which the relation of the planets to the Sun is established, and the Sun proved to be the great regulator of their motions, Newton proceedæd to inquire ſarther into the nature of this deflecting force, of which nature he had discovered only one circumstance He now endeavoured to discover vhat variation is made in this deflection by a change of distance IFf this follow any regular law, it will be a material point ascertained. This can be discovered only by comparing the momentary deflections of a planet in its diſferent distances from the Sun. The magnitude or intensity of the force must be conceived as precisely proportional to the magnitude oſ the deſlection which it produces in the same time, just as ve measure the force of terrestrial gravity by the deflection of sixteen feet in a second; which we observe, whether it be a bombshell flying three miles, or a pebble thrown to the distance of a few yards, or a stone simply dropped from the hand. Hence we infer, that gravity is every where the samee. We must reason in the same vay concerning the planetary deſlections m the different parts of their orbits. Eeplers second law, with the assistance oſ the first, enabled Newton to make this comparison. This second general ſact is, that each planet describes an ellipse, having the Sun in one focus. Therefore, to learn the proportion oſ the momentary deflections in different points of the ellipse, we have only to know the proportion of the arches deseribed in equal small moments of time. This we may learn by drawing a pair of lines from the Sun to different parts of the ellipse, so that each pair of lines shall comprehend equal areass The arches on which these areas stand must be deseribed in equal times; and the proportion of their linear deflections from the tangents must be taken for the proportion oſ the deſlecting forces which produced them. Vou. III. G To make those equal areas, ve must know the precise ſorm of the ellipse, and we must know the geometrical properties of this figure, that ve may know the proportion of those linear deflections. 202. The force by which a planet describes areas proportional to the times round the focus of its elliptical orbit is, as the squore of its distance from the focus inversely. Let F be the deflecting foree in the aphelion A (Fig17.) and f the force in any intermediate point P. Let V and u be the velocities in A and P, and C and c be the deflective chords of the equicurve circles in those points. Then, by a dynamical proposition ve have F: ſ c v , or=Væ: ?C. But, when areas are described proportional to the times, the velocity in A is to that in P inversely as the perpendiculars drawn from F to the tangents in A and P. F A iĩs perpendicular to the tangent in A, and F N is perpendicular to the tangent P N. Theret: C 2 . ? fore ?: / & F: FN Xc: FA' }X C. But it is known that C, the deflective chord at A, is equal to L the principal parameter of the ellipse. It is also known that P O is half the deflective chord at P, and that P R is half the principal parameter L. Moreover, the triangles F N P and P Q O and P QR are similar, and therefore FN: FP PQ: PO. But PO: PQæ/PQQ: P R. Therefore PO: PR=PO: PQ Thereſore FN: FPPR: PO, and FN?  POFP x PR, and FN X 2 PO= FP? X PR; that is, PN? x cFP } L. Therefore F: // FP? x L: F A'X L,/FP: FA?, that is, inversely as the square of the distance from F. 203. This proposition may be demonstrated more brieſly, and perhaps more palpably, as follows: If Pꝓ be a very minute arch, and ꝓr be perpendicular to the radius vector PF, then ꝗꝑ, the linear deflection from the tangent is, ultimately, in the proportion of ꝓ æ. But, because equal areas are described in equal times, the elementary triangle P F ꝓ is a constant quantity, vhen the moments are supposed equal, and thereſore ꝓr is inversely as PF, and ꝓ r inversely as PF?. Thereſore ꝗp is inversely as PF or the momentary deflection from the tangent is inversely as the square of PF, the distance from the focus. Now, the momentary deflection is the measure of the deflecting force, and the force is inversely as the square of the distance from the focus. Here, then, is exhibited all that we know of that property or mechanical affection of the masses of matter which compose the solar system. Each is under the continual influence oſ a ſorce directed toward the Sun, urging the planet in that direction; and this force is variable in its intensity, being more intense as the planet comes nearer to the Sun; and this change is in the inverse duplicate ratio of its distance ſfrom the Sun. It will free us entirely from many metaphysical objections which have heen made to this inference, if, instead of saying that the planets manifest such a varinble tendency toward the Sun, we content ourselves vith simply aſfirming the ſact, that the planets are continually deflected toward the Sun, and that the momentary deflections are in the inverse duplicate ratio of the distances from him. 204. We must aſfirm the same thing of the forces which retain the satellites in their elliptical orbits round their primary planets. For they also deseribe ellipses having the primary planet in the focus; and we must also include the Halleyan comet, which shewed, by its re-à-)parition in I759, that it deseribes an ellipse having the Sun in the focus. If the other comets be also carried round in eccentric ellipses, we must drav the same conclusion. Nay, should they describe parabolas or hyperbolas having the Sun in the focus, we should still find that they are retained by a force n versely proportional to the square of the distanee. This ĩs demonstrated in precisely the sume manner as in the ease oſ elliptical motion; namely, by comparing the lincar defleetions corresponding to equal elementary sectors of the parabola or hyperbola. These are deseribed in equal times, and the linear deflections are proper measures of the deflecting foreess. We shall find in both of those eurves ꝗ proportional to  ??. It is the common property of the conie sections reſerred to a ſocus. It is most probable that the comets deseribe very eccentric ellipses. But we get sight of them only when they come near to the Sun, within the orbit of Saturn. None has yet been observed as ſar off as that planet. The visible portion of their orbits sensibly coincides with a parabola or hyperbola, having the same focus; and their motion, computed on this supposition, agrees with observation. The computation in the parabola is very easy, and can then be transferred to an ellipse by an ingenious theorem of Dr Halley's in his Astronomy of Comets:. M. Lambert of Berlin has greatly simplified the whole processs The student vill find much valuable information on this subjeet in MtLaurins Treatise of Fluxions. The chapters on curvature and its variations, are scarcely distinguishable from propositions on curvilineal motion and deflecting forces. Indeed, since all that ve know of a deſlecting force ĩs the deflection which we aseribe to it, the employment of the word sorce in such discussions is little more than an abbreviation of language This proposition being, by its services in explaining the phenomena of nature, the most valuable mechanical theorem ever given to the world, ve may believe that much attention has been given to ĩt, and that many methods of demonstrating it have been offered to the choice of mathematicians, the authors claiming some merit in facilitating or improving the investigationn. Newton's demonstration is very short, but is a good deal encumbered with composition of ratios, and an arithmetical or algebraical tur of expres sion, frequently mixed vith ideas purely geometrical. Newton was obliged to compress iuto it some properties oſ the conic sections which were not very familiar at that time, because not of frequent use: they are now ſamiliar to every student, making part oſ the treatises of conie sections By referring to these, the succeeding authors gave their demonstrations the appearance of greater simplicity and elegance. But Newton gives another demonstration in the second and third editions of the Principia, employing the deflective chord of the equicurve circle precisely in the way employed in our textt This mode of demonstration has been varied a little, by employing the radius oſ curvature, instead of the chord passing through the centre of forces. The theorems given by M. De Moivre were the ſirst in this way, and are very general, and very elegant. Those of Jo. Bernoulli, Hermann, and Keill, scarcely diſfer from them, and none of them all is preſerable to Newtons, now mentioned, either for generality, simplicity, or elegance. 205. It remains now to inquire, hether there he any analogy between the forces which retain the different planets in their respective orbits. It is highly probable that there is, seeing they all respect the Sun. But it is by no means certain. Different bodies exhibit very diſſerent laws of action. Those of magnetism, electricity, and eohesion, are extremely diſferent; and the chymical affinities, considered as the effects of attractive and repulsive forces, are as various as the substances themselves. As we know nothing of the constitution of the heavenly bodies, ve cannot, a priori, say that it is not so0 heree Perhaps the planets are deflected by the impulsion of a ſluid in motion, or are thrust toward the Sun by an elastic æther, denser and more elastie as we recede from the Sun. The Sun may be a magnet, and at the same ſime electrica. The 8un s0 constituted would act on a magnetical ꝓlanet both by magnetical and electrical attraction, while another planet is affected only by his electricity. A thousand such suppositions may be formed, all very possiblee Newton therefore could not leave this question undecided. Various means of deciding it are offered to us by the phenomena. The motion of the comets, and partieularly of the Halleyan comet, seems to decide it at once. This comet came from a distance, far beyond the remotest of the known planets, and came nearer to the Sun than Venus. Therefore we are entitled to say, that a force inversely as the square of the distance from the Sun, extends without interruption through the whole planetary spacess But farther, if we calculate the deflection actually observed in the Halleyan comet, when it was at the same distance from the Sun as any of the planets, ve shall find iĩt to be precisely the same with the deflection of that planet. There can remain no doubt therefore, that it is one and the same force which deflects both the comet and the planet. But Newton could not employ this argumentt. The motions of the comets were altogether unknown, and probably would have remained s0, had he not discovered the sameness of the planetary force through its whole scene of influencee The fact is, that Newton's ſirst conjectures aubout the law oſ the solar force were founded on much easier observations. Keplers third law is, that the squares of the periodic times of the planets are in the same proportion with the cubes of their mean distances from the Sun. Thus, Mars is nearly four times as far from the Sun as Mercury, and his period is nearly eight times that of Mercury. Nov, 2=64, 68. The planets deseribe ſigures which diſfer very little from cireles, hose radiũi are those mean distances. If they deseribed circles, it would have been very easy to ascertain the proportion of the centripetal forces. For, by Dynamies d we had ſ rã Nov, in the planetary motions, ve have d l . t?d. Therefore, in this case, ſ q or æ that is, the forces which regulate the motions oſf the planets at their mean distances are inversely as the squares oſ those distances. It was this notion (by no means precise) of the planetary force, which had first occupied the thoughts of young Newton, while yet a student at collegand, on no better authority than this, had he supposed that a similar analogy would be observed between the deflection of the Moon and that of a cannon ball. His disappointment, occasioned by his erroneous estimation of the bulk of this Earth, and his horror at the thoughts of any such controversies as his optical discoveries had engaged him in, seem to have made him resolve to keep these thoughts to himself. But when Picard's measure of the Earth had removed his cause of mistake, and he saw that the analogy did really hold vith respect to the force reaching from the Earth to the Moon; he then thought it worth his hile to study the subject seriously, and to investigate the deflection in the arch of an ellipsee His study terminated in the proposition demonstrated abovedoubtless to his great delightt. He was no longer contented with the vague guess which he had made as to the proportion of the forces which deflected the different planets. The orbit of Mars, and still more the orbit of Mercury, is too eccentric to be considered as a circlee Besides, at the mean distances, the radius vector is not perpendicular to the curve, as it is in a circle He vas now in a condition to compare the simultaneous deſlections of any two planets, in any part of their orbitss This he has done. In the fifteenth proposition of the first book of the Principia, he demonstrates, that if the forces actuating the different planets are in the inverse duplicate ratio of the distances from the Sun, then the squares of the periodic times must be as the cubes oſ the mean distances. This being a matter of observation, it follows, that the forces are in this mverse duplicate ratio of the distances. Thus was his darling objeet attained. But as this ſifteenth proposition has some intrieacy, it is not so clear as ve should vish in an elementary course like ours. The same truth may be easily made appear in the following manner. 206. If a planet, when at its mean distunce from the Sun, be projected in a direction perpendicular io the radius vector, with the sume velocity which it hus in that point of its orbit, it will describe a cirele round the Sun in the same time that it describes the ellipse. Let ABPD (Fig. 18.) be the elliptical orbit, having the Sun in the focus S. Let AP, BD, be the two axes, C the centre, A the aphelion, P the perihelion, and B, D, the two situations of mean distancee About S deseribe the cirele BDM. Let BK and BN be very small equal arehes of the cirele and the ellipse, and let BE be one half of BS. BM, the double of BS, is the deflective chord of the cirele oſ eurvature in the point B oſ the orbit, and BE is one-fourth of that chord. Therefore the velocity in B is that which the force in B would generate by uniformly impelling the planet along BE. But a hody projected with this velocity, in the direction BK, will deseribe the circle BEMD. The arches BK and BN being equal, and deseribed with equal velocities, will be described in equal times. The triangles BS, BNS, having equal bases BK and BN, are proportional to their altitudes BS and BC (for the elementary arch BN may be considered as coinciding with the tangent in B, and BC is perpendicular to this tangent). But, because BS is equal to CA, the area of the circle BUD is to that of the ellipse ABPD as AC to BC, that is, ns BS to BC, that is, as the triangle BES to the triangle BNS. These triangles are thereſore similar portions of the whole areas, and thereſore, since they are described in equal times, 5 the cirele BMD and the ellipse ABPD will also be described in equal times. Thus it appears that Newtons ſirst conjecture was perfectly just. For if the planets, instead of deseribing ther elliptical orbits, were describing cireles at the same distances, and in the same times, they would do it by the influence oſ the same forces. Therefore sinee, in this case, ve should have ?æ , the forces vill be proportional to d inversely. 207. We nov see that the forees which retain the different planets in their orbits are not diſferent ſorces, but that all are under the influence of one force, which extends from the Sun in every direction, and decreases in intensity as the square of the distance from the Sun increnses. The intensity at any particular distance is the same, in whatever direction the distance is taken. Although the planetary courses do not depart far from our ecliptie, the influenee of the regulating force is by no means confined io that neighbourhood. Comets have been seen, which rise almost perpendieular to the eeliptic; and their orbits or trajectories occupy all quarters of the heavens. This relation, in which they all stand to the Sun, may justly be ealled a cosmieal relation, depending on their mutual eonstitution, which appears to be the same in them all. As this foree respeets the Sun, it may be called a soLAE FORCE, in the same sense as we use the term magnetical force. All persons unaffected by peculiar philosophical notions, conceive magnetism distinetly enough by calling it Attraction. For, whatever it is, ĩts efſects resemble those of attraction. IF we eonceive the magnetical phenomena as eſfects oſ a tendency toward the magnet, inherent in the iron, ve may eonceive the planetary deflections as produced in the same way; but this also indicates a sameness in the constitution of all the planetss Or we may aseribo the deflections to the impulsions or pressure of an æther; but this also indicates a sameness of constitution over the whole system. Thus, whatever notion ve entertain oſ what ve have called a solar or a planetary force (and the observed law of action limits us to no exelusive manner of conceiving it), we see a power of nature, whether extrinsic, like the action of a ſfluid, or intrinsic, like tendencies or attractions, which fit the Sun and planets for a particular purpose, giving them a cosmical relation, and laws oſ action. ”08. It is still more interesting to remark, that the satellites observe the same lav of action. For, in the litile systems of a planet and its satellites, ve observe the same analogy between the distances and periodic times. In short, a centripetal force in the inverse duplicate ratio of the distance seems to be the bond by which all is held together. 209. As the analogy observed by Kepler between the distances of the revolving bodies and the periods oſ their revolutions, led Newton to the discovery oſ the law oſ planetary deflection; so, this law being established, ve are led to the second and third fact observed by Kepler as its necessary consequences. It appears, that the periodic time of a planet under the influence of a force inversely as the square of the distance, depends on its mean distance alone, and vill be the same, whether the planet describe a circle or an ellipse having any degree whatever oſ eccentricity. This, as was already observed, is the fifteenth proposition of the ſirst book of Newton's Principia. Suppose the shorter axis B D of the ellipse A B P D Fig. 19.) to diminish continually, the longer axis A P remaining the same. As the extremity B of the invariable line B S moves from B toward C, the extremity S will move toward P, and vhen B coincides with C, S vill coincide with P, and the ellipse is changed into a straight line P A, whose length is twice the mean distance S B. In all the successive ellipses produced by this gradual diminution of CB, the periodic time remains unchanged. Just beſore the perfect coincidence of B with C, the ellipse may be conceived as undistinguishable ſrom the line P A. The revolution in this ellipse is undistinguishable from the ascent of the body from the perihelion P to the aphelion A, and the subsequent descent from A to P. Therefore a body under the influence oſ the central force will descend from A to P in half the time of the revolution in the ellipse ADPBA. Therefore the time of descending from any distance B S is half the period of a hody revolving at half that distance from the Sun. By such means we can tell the time in which any planet would ſall to the Sunn. Multiply the halſ of the time of a revolution by the square root of the cube of 4, that is, by the square root of , the produet is the time of descent. Or divide the time of half a revolution by the square root of the cube of 2, that is, by the square root of 8, that is, by 2,82847; or, which is the shortest process, multiply the time of a revolution by the decimal 0, 176776; d. h. Mercury will fall to the Sun in - 15 18 Venus - - - - - - 39 I7 The Earth --2 &a4”; Mars - - - - - - 121 O dupiter - - - - 290 O Saturm - - - - 98 O Georgian planet - - -1IbLao6 o The Moon to this Earth - - 4 al Cor. The squares of the times oſ falling to the Sun are as the cubes of the distances from him. 210. So far did Newton proceed in his reasonings from the observations of Keplerr. But there remained many important questions to be decided, in which those observations offered no direct help. It appeared improbable that the solar force should not affect the secondary planets. It has been demonstrated (4) that if a body P revolve round another body S, describing areas proportional to the times, while S revolves round some other body, or is afſected by some external force, P is not only acted on by a central foree direoted to S, but is also aſfected by every accelerating foree which acts on S. While, therefore, the Moon deseribes areas proportional to the times round the Earth, it is not only deflected iovard the Earth, but it is also deflected as much as the Earth is toward the Sun. For the Moon accompanies the Earth in all its motionss. The same thing must be aſſirmed concerning the satellites attending the other planets. And thus has Newton established a fourth proposition, namely, The force by which a secondary planet is made to accompany the primary in its orbit round the Sun is continually directeã to the Sun, and is inversely as the square of the distunce from him. For, as the primary changes its distancæ ſrom the Sun, the force by which it is retained in its orbit varies in this inverse duplicate ratio of the distance. Therefore the force which causes the secondary planet to accompany its primary must vary in the same proportion, in order to produce the same change in its motion that is produeed in that of the primary. And, further, since the ſorce which retains Jupiter,in his orbit is to that which retains the Earth as the square of the Earth's distance is to that of Jupiters distance, the forces by which their respective satellites are made to accompany them must vary in the same proportion. Thus, all the bodies oſ the solar system are continually urged by a foree directed to the Sun, and decreasing as the square of the distance from him increases. 211. Newton remarked, that in all the changes of motion observable in our sublunary world, the changes in the acting bodies are equal and opposite. In all impulsions, one body is observed to lose as much motion as the other gains All magnetical and electrieal attractions and repulsions are mutual. Every action seems to be accompanied by an equal reaction in the opposite direction. He even imagined that it may be proved, ſrom abstract principles, that it must be 50. He therefore affirmed, that this law obtained also in the celestial motions, and that not only were the planets continually impelled toward the Sun, but also that the Sun was impelled toward the planets. The doubts which may be entertained concerning the authority oſ this Iaw oſ motion have been noticed already. At present, we are to notice the facts which the celestial motions furnish in support of Sir Isaac Newton's assertion. 212. Directions have been given (56.) how to calculate the Sun's place for any given moment. When the astronomers had obtained instruments oſ nice construction, and had improved the art of observing, there was found an irregularity in this caleulation, which had an evident relation o the Moon. At new Moon, the observations corresponded exactly with the Sun's caleulated place; but seven or eight days after, the Sun is observed to be about 8 or 10 to the eastward of his ealeulated place, when the Moon is in her ſirst quadrature, and he is observed as much to the westward when she is in the last quadraturee In intermediate situations, the error is observed to inerease in the proportion of the sine of the Moons distance from conjunetion or opposition. Things must be so, if it be true that the deſleetion of the Moon toward the Earth is accompanied with an equal deflection of the Earth toward the Moon. For the Moon vill not revolve round the Earth, but the Earth and Moon will revolve round their common centre of position. When the Moon is in her first quadrature, her position may be represented by M (Fig. 20.) while the Earth is at E, and their common centre is at A A speetator in A vill see the Sun S in his caleulated place B. But the spectar in the Earth E sees the Sun in C, to the leſt hand, or eastward of B. The interval B C measures the angle BSC, or ASE, subtended at the Sun by the distance EA of the common centre of the Earth and Moon from the centre of the Earth. At new Moon, A, E, and S, are in a straight line, so that B and C eoincidee. At the last quadrature, the Moon is at m, the Earth at , and the common centre at . Nov the Sun is seen at c, 8 or 10 to the westward of his calculated placee This correction has been pointed out by Newton, but it was not observed at the first, owing to its being blended with the Suns horizontal parallax, which had not been taken into account. But it was soon recognised, and it now makes an article among the various equations used in calculating the Suns place. Here, then, is a plain proof of a mutual action and reaction of the Earth and Moon. For, since they revolve round a common centre, the Earth is unquestionably deflected into the curve line by the action of a force directed towards the Moon. But we have a much better proof. The waters of the ocean are observed every day to heap up on that part of our globe which is under the Moon. In this situation, the weight of the water is diminished by the attraction of the Moon, and it requires a greater elevation, or a greater quantity, to compensate for the diminished weight. On the other hand, ve see the waters abstracted from all those parts which have the Moon in the horizon. Kepler, after asserting, in very positive terms, that the Earth and Moon would run together, and are prevented by a mutual circulation round their common centre, adduces the tides as a proof. 2I3. As the art of ohservation continued to improve, astronomers were able to remark abundant prooſs of the tendency oſ the Sun toward the planets When the great planets Jupiter and Saturn are in quadrature with the Earth, to the right hand oſ the line drawn from the Earth to the Sun's caleulated place, the Sun is then observed to shiſt to the leſt of that line, keeping always on the opposite side oſ the common centre of position. These deviations are indeed very minute, because the Sun is vastly more massive than all the planets collected into one lump. But in favourable situations of these planets, they are perſectly snsible, and have been calculated; and they must be taken into aceount in every calculation of the Sun's place in order to have it with the accuracy that is now attainable. It must be granted that this accuracy, actually attained by means of those corrections, and unattainable without them, is a positive prooſ of this mutual deflection of the Sun tovard the planets. The quantity corresponding to one planet is too small, of itself, to be very distinetly observed; hut, by oceasionally combining with others of the same kind, the sum becomes very sensible, and susceptible of measure. It sometimes amounts to 88 seconds, and must never he omitted in the caleulations subservient to the finding the longitude of a ship at sea. Philosophy, in this instance, is greatly indebted to the artss. And she has liberally repaid the service. 214. Here it is worthy of remark, that had the Sun heen much smaller than he is, so0 that he would have moved much further from the common centre, and would have been much more agitated by the tendencies to the different planets, it is probable that we never should have acquired any distinct or useful knovledge of the system. For we now see that Kepler's laws cannot be strietly true; yet it vas those laws alone that suggested the thought, and furnished to young Newton the means of investigation. The analogy of the periodic times and distances is accurate, only vwith respeet to the common centre, but not with respect to the Sun. But the great mass of the Sun occasions this common centre t be generally within his surſace, and it is never distant from it one-fourth of his diameter. Therefore this third law of Kepler is so nearly exact in respect of the Sunm, that the art oſ observation, in Newton's lifetime, could mot have found any errorss. The penetrating eye of New- ton however immediately perceived his own good fortune, and his error in supposing Kepler's laws accurately truæe. But this was not enough ſor his philosophy; he was determined that it should narrate nothing but truth. With great ingenuity, and elegance of method, he demonstrates that his mechanical inferences from Keplers laws are still strictly true, and that his own law of planetary force is exact, although the centre of revolution is not the centre oſ the Sun. All the difference respects the absolute magnitude of the periodic times in relation to the magnitude of the force. This he demonstrates in a series of propositions, of which we have given the chief. 215. Newton proceeds still further in his investigation oſ the extent of the influence of this planetary force, and says that all the planets mutually tend toward each other. It does not appear how this opinion arose in his mind. There are abundance of phenomena, however, oſ easy observation, which make it very evident. It was probably a conjecture, suggested by observing this reciprocal action between the Earth and Mooi. But he immediately followed it into its consequences, and pointed them out to the astr&homers. They are very important, and explain many phenomena which had hitherto greatly perplexed the astronomers. Suppose Jupiter and Mars to he in conjunetion, lying in the same line from the Sun. As Mars revolves much quicker than Jupiter, he gets before him, but, being altracted by Jupiter, his motion is retardedand Jupiter, being attracted by Mars, is acceleratedl. On the contrary, before Mars arrives at conjunetion with Jupiter, Mars is accelerated, and Jupiter is retarded. Further, the attraction of Mars by Jupiter must diminish the tendency of Mars to the Sun, or must act in opposition to the attraction of the Sun; therefore the curvature of Marss orbit in that place must be diminished. On the contrary, the tendency of Jupiter to. Mars, acting in the same direction as his tendency to the Sun, must increase the curvature of that part of Jupiter's orbit. If Jupiter be at this time advancing to his aphelion, this increase of curvature will sooner bend the line of his motion from an obtuse into a right angle with the radius vector. Therefore his aphelion will be sooner attained, and it will appear to have shifted to the westward. For the opposite reasons, the apsides of Mars vill seem to shift to the eastward. There are other situations of these pPlanets where the contrary effects will happen. In each revolution, each planet will be alternately accelerated twice, and twice retarded, and the apsides of the exterior planet will continually recede, and that of the interior will advance. It is obvious that this disturbance of the motion of a planet by its deflection to another, though probably very minute, yet being continued for a tract oſ time, ĩts accumulated result may become very sensiblee These changes are all susceptible of accurate calculation, as we shall aſterwards explain particularly. This must be considered as a convincing proof of the mutual action of the heavenly bodies, and it adds fresh lustre to the penetration and genius of Newton, vho made these assertions independent oſ observation, pointing out to astronomers the sure means of perfecting their knowledge of the celestial motions. 216. Here therefore we have established a ſifth proposition in physical astronomy, namely, that that all the bodies in the solar system tend mutually toward one another, with Sorces which vary in the inverse duplicate ratio of the distances. It did not satisſy Newton that he merely pointed out the gross effect oſ this mutual tendency. He gave astronomers the means of investigating and ascertaining its intensity, and its variation by a variation of distance The effect of the Earths tendency to Jupiter during any length of time, may be computed by means of Newtons dynamical propositions, eontained in the first book of his Principia, particuVor. IIL H larly by the 89th. Oſ these we have given a proper selection in the general doctrines of Dynamies. 217. But the inquisitive mind of Newton did not stop here. He was anxious to learn whether this planetary tendency had any resemblance or relation to forces with which ve are more familiarly acquainted. Of this kind are magnetism and gravity. He vas the more incited to this investigation by the conjectures on this subject which had arisen in the mind of Kepler. This great astronomer had heen much taken with the discovery just published by Dr Gilbert of Colchester, stating that this Earth is a great magnet, and he vas disposed to aseribe the revolution of the Moon to the magnetical influence of the Earth. ITt appears from Newtons papers, that he had made a great many experiments ſor discovering the lav of magnetic actionn. But he had found it so dependant on cireumstances of form and situation, and so changeable by time, that it seemed susceptible of no comparison with the solar force; and he soon gave it up. He vas more successful in tracing the resemblances observable in the phenomena of common gravity. It has been already remarked (197.) that, very early in life, he had conjectured thãt it was the same with the solar force, and that aſter he had formed the opinion that the solar force varied in the inverse duplicate ratio of the distance, he put his conjecture to the test, by comparing the fall of a stone with the deflection of the Moonn. The distance oſ the Moon is estimated to be 60 semidiameters of the Earth. Thereſore, if gravity and the lunar deflecting ſorce be the same, the stone should deſleet as much in one second as the Moon does in a minute. For we may, vithout any sensible error, suppose that the lunar force acts uniformly during one minute. If so, the linear deſlections must be as the squares of the times. The defleetion in a minute must be 60 X 60 times, or 8600 times the deſlection in a second. But, according to the law of planetary force, the deſlection at the Earth's surſace must be 60 x 0, or 3600 times the deſlection at the Moon. Now, in a second, a stone ſalls 16 ſeet and an inch. Thereſore the Moon should deflect 16 feet and an inch in a minute ſrom the tangent of her orbit. Newton calculated the versed sine oſ the arch described by the Moon in a minute, to a radius equal to 6GO semidiameters of the Earth. He ſound it only about 133 ſeet, and he gave over any ſarther inquiry. But he had hastily supposed a degree to contain GO miles, not attending to the difference between a geographical mile or 60th of a degree, and an English statute milee A degree contains 6 such miles; so that he had made the Moons orbit, and consequently her deflection, too small in the same proportionn. IF we increase the calculated deflection in this proportion, it comes out exactly 167; and the conjecture is fully established. When Picard's accurate measure of the Earth had enabled Newton to confirm his former conjecture coneerning the identity of the planetary force and terrestrial gravity, he again made the calculation and comparison in the most scrupulous manner. For we now see that several cireumstances must be taken into the account, which he had omitted in his first computation ſrom Picards measure of the Earth. The ſall in a second is not the exact measure of terrestrial gravit.. A stone would ſall farther, were it not that its gravity is diminished by the Earth's rotation. It is also diminished by the action of the Sun and Moon, and by the weight of the air which the stone displaces. All these diminutions of the accelerating force of gravity are susceptible of exact calculation, and were accordingly calculated by Newton, and the amount added to the observed acceleration of a falling body. In the next place, the real radius oſ the Moons orbit must be reckoned only from the common centre of the Earth and Moon. And then the force deduced from this deflection must be increased in the subduplicate ratio of the matter in the Earth o the matter in the Earth and Moon added together ã All this has been done, and the result coincides precisely vith observation. This may be demonstrated in another vayg We can tell in what time a body would revolve round the Earth, close to ĩts surface. For ve must have ? proportional to . It vill be found to be 84 minutes and 84 seconds. Then we know the arch described in one second, and can calculate its deflection from the tangent. We shall find it 16, feet, the same with that produced by common gravity. 2I8. Terrestrial gravity, theręfore, or that force which causes bodies to full, or to press on their supporis, is only porticular example of that universal tendency, by which all the hodies of the solar system are retained in their orbits. We must now extend to those bodies the other symptoms of common gravity. It is by gravity that water arranges itself into a level surface; that is, a surface which makes a part of the great sphere of the ocean. The weight of this water keeps it together in a round form. We must ascribe the globular forms of the Sun and planets to a similar operationn. A body on their surface will press it as a heavy body presses the ground. Dr Hooke remarks, that all the protuberances on the surface of the Moon are of forms consistent with a gravity toward its centree They are generally sloping, and, though in some places very rugged and precipitous, yet nowhere overhang, or have any shape that would not stand on the ground. The more rugged parts are most evidently matter which has been throom up by volcanic explosion, and have fallen down again by their lunar gravity. 219. That property by which bodies are heavy is called GRAVITY, HEAVINESSthe being heavy; and the fact that it moves toward the Earth, may be called GRAVITATION. Woaile it falls, or presses on its supports, it may be said to gravitate, to give indication of its being gravis or heavy. In this sense the planets gravitate to the Sun, und the se- condary planets to their primaries; and, in short, every body in the solar system to every other body. By the verb to gravitate, nothing is meant but the fact, that they either actually approach, or manifest, by a very sensible pressure, tendencies to approach the body to which they are said to gravitate. The verb, or the noun, should not be considerd as the expression of any quality or property, but merely of a phenomenon, a fact or event in nature. 220. But this deviation from uniform rectilineal motion is considered as an effect, and ĩt is of importance to discover the cause. Now, in the most ſfamiliar instance, the fall or pressure oſ a heavy body, we ascribe the fall, or pressure indieating the tendency to fall, to its heaviness. But we have no other notion of this heaviness than the very thing which we ascribe to it as an effectt. The feeling the heaviness of the piece of lead that lies in our hand, is the sum of all that we know about it. But we consider this heaviness as a ꝓroperty of all terrestrial matter, because all bodies give some of those appearances which we consider as indications of it. All move toward the Earth iſ not supported, and all press on the support. The ſeeling of pressure which a heavy body excites might be considered as its characteristic phenomenon; for it is this feeling that makes us think it a ſorcee must oppose our force to it; but we cannot distinguish it from the feeling of any other equal pressure. It is most distinguishable as the cause of motion, as a moving or accelerating force. In short, we know nothing of gravity but the phenomena, which we consider, not as gravity, but as its indication. It is, like every other forcean unknown quality. The ueight of a body should be distinguished ſrom its gravity or heaviness, and the term should be reserved for expressing the measure of the united gravitation of all the matter in the body. This is indeed the proper sense oſ the term weight—pondus. In ordinary business, we measure the weights of bodies by means of known units of weight. A piece oſ lead is said to be of twenty pounds veight when it halances twenty pieces of matter, each of which is a pound; but we frequently measure it by means oſ other pressures, as vhen we judge of it by the division to which it draws the scale of a spring steelyard. 221. We estimate the quantity oſ matter in a body by its weight, and say that there is nineteen times as much matter in a cubice ſoot of gold as there is in a cubic foot oſ water. This evidently presupposes that all matter is heavy, and equally heavythat every primitive atom of matter is equally heavy. But this seems to be more than ve are entitled to say, without some positive proof. There is nothing inconceivable or absurd in supposing one atom to be twice or thrice as heavy as another. As gravity is a contingent quality oſ matter, its absolute strength or force is also contingent and arbitrary. We can conceive an atom to have no weight. Nay, we ean as clearly conceive an atom of matter to be endowed with a tendeney upvards as with a tendency downwards. Accordingly, during the prevalence of the Stahlian doctrine of combustion, that matter which imparts inflammability to bodies vas supposed to be not only without weight, but positively light, and to diminish the weight of the other ingredients with which it was combined in a combustible body. In this way, the abettors oſ that docetrine accounted for the increase oſ weight observable when a body is burnt. There is nothing absurd or unreasonable in all this; and had ve no other indication oſ gravity but its pressure, we do not see how this question can be decided. But gravity is not only a pressing power, but also a moving or aceelerating power. If a body consisted oſ a thousand atoms oſ gravitating matter, and as many atoms of matter which does not gravitate, and if the gravity oſ each atom exerted the pressure of one grain, this body would weigh a thousand grains, either by a balance or a spring steelyard, yet it contains two thousand atoms oſ matter. But take ano- ther hody oſ the same veight, but consisting wholly of gravitating atoms; drop these two bodies at once from the handthe last mentioned vill fall IG feet in the first secondthe other ill ſall only 8 feet. For in both there is the same moving force; thereſore the same quantity oſ motion vill be produeed in both bodies; that is, the products of the quantities oſ matter by the velocities generated vill be the same. Thereſore the velocity acquired by the mixed hody will be one half oſ that acquired in the same time by the simple body. The phenomenon vill be what was asserted, one vill ſall I6 and the other only B feet. This ill be still more ſorcibly conceived, ĩf we take two bodies a and b, each containing 1000 atoms of gravitating matter, and attach a to another body c, containing 1000 atoms which do not gravitat. Now, unless we suppose c moveable and arrestable by a thought or a vord, we can have no hesitation in saying, that the mass a +c vill fall vith halſ the velocity of b. We see thereſore that the accelerating power alone of gravity enables us to decide the question,  whether all terrestrial matter gravitates, and gravitates alike We have only to try whether all terrestrial bodies ſall equally far in ſhe same time, or receive an equal increment of velocity in he same time. This test of the matter did not escape the penetrating genius oſ young Newton. He made experiments on every kind of substance, metals, stones, voods, grain, salts, animal substances, e. and made them in a vay susceptible of the utmost aceuracy, as we shall see aſtervardss. The result was, that all these substances were equally accelerated; and, on this authority, Newton thought himselſ entitled to say that ALL TEREESTRIAL MATTER IS EQUALLY HEAVY. This however may be disputed. For it ĩs plain, that if all bodies contain an equal proportion oſ gravitating and nongravitating matter, they will be equally accelerated; nay, the unequal gravitation of diſſerent substances, and even positive levity, may be so compensated by the proportion of those different kinds of matter, that the total gravitation may still be proportional to the whole quantity oſ matter. But, till ve have some authority for saying that there is a difference in the gravitation of different atoms, the just rules of philosophical discussion oblige us to believe that all gravitate alike This is corroborated by the universality of the lav oſ mutual and equal reaction. This is next to demonstration, that the primitive atoms are alike in every respect, and therefore in their gravitation. We are entitled thereſore to say, that all terrestrial matter is equally heavy, and that the weight of a body is the measure oſ the united gravitation of every atom, and thereſore is a measure oſ, or is proportional to, the quantity oſ matter contained in it. 222. Newton naturally, and justly, extended the affirmation to the planets and to the Sun. But here arises a question, at once nice and important. The law of gravitation, s0 often mentioned, is exhibited in the mutual defleetions of great masses of matter. These deſlections are in the inverse duplicate ratio of the distances between the centres of the masses. Are we warranted by this observation to say, that this is also the law of action between every atom of one body and every atom of another ? Can we say in general that the law of corpuscular action is the same vith that of masses, resulting from the combined action of each atom on each? We are assured by experience that it is not. For we observe that, in magnets, the law of action (that is, the relation subsisting between the distances and the intensities of foree) is different in almost every diſferent magnet, and seems to depend in a great measure on their form. Newton was too eautious, and too good a logician, to advance such a proposition without proof; and thereſore, nnſining himselſ to the single case oſ sperical and spheroidal bodies, the forms in which we observe the planetary masses to be compacted, he inquired what sensible action between the masses will result from an action between their particles inversely proportional to the square of their distances. Let ALBM, albm (Fig. 2.) be two spherieal surfaces, of which C is the common centre, and let the space between them be filled with gravitating matter, uniformly dense. Let ꝓ be a particle placed any where within this spherical shell, to every particle of which it gravitates with a ſorce inversely as the square of its distance from it. This particle will have no tendency to move in any direction, because its gravitation in any one direction is exactly balanced by an equal gravitation in the opposite direction. Draw through ꝓ the two straight lines dp., è p,, making a very small angle at 7. This may represent the section of a very slender double cone dpe, ?p., having » for the common vertex, and de, 3: for the diameters of the circular basess. The gravitation of ꝓ to the matter in the base d æ is equal to ĩts gravitation to the matter in the base 2:. For the number of particles in deæ is to the number in 3. as the surface oſ the base d æ to that of the base 1., that is, as d è to 3, that is, as ꝑ d* to ꝓV, that ĩs, as the gravitation to a particle in 3: to the gravitation to a particle n d?. Therefore the whole gravitation to the matter in de is the same with the whole gravitation to the matter in 3.since it is also in the opposite direction, the partiele 2 is in equilibrio. The same thing may be demonstrated of the gravitation to the matter in  and s1, and, in Iike manner, of the gravitation to the matter in the sections of the cones d pe, ; 3 by any other concentrie surſace Consequently, the gravitation to the whole matter contained in the solid d q7e is equal to the gravitation to the whole matter in the solid àts:, and the particle ꝓ is still in equilibrio. Now, since the lines d p., e p may be drawn in any direction, and thus be made to occupy the whole sphere, it is evident that the gravitation of ꝑ is balanced in every direction, and therefore it has no tendency to move in any direction in consequence oſ this gravitation to the spherical shell of matter comprehended between the surſaces A L BM and a lb m. It is also evident, that this holds true with respeet to all the matter comprehended between A L BM and the concentric surſace  v n passing through ꝓ; in short,  is in equilibrio in its gravitation to all the matter more remote than itself from the centre oſ the sphere, and appears as if it did not gravitate at all to any matter more remote from the centre. 223. We have supposed the spherical shell to be uniformly densee But ꝓ will still hbe in equilibrio, although the shell be made up of concentrie strata of different density, provided that each stratum be uniſormly dense. For should we suppose, that, in the space comprehended between A L BM and ꝓn v, there occurs a surface a lbm of a different density from all the rest, the gravitation to the intercepted portions q 7 and st are equal, because these portions are oſ equal density, and are proportional to ꝑ q and ꝓ5' imversely The proposition may therefore he expressed in the ſollowing very general terms:  A particle s placed any where within a spherical shell of gravitating  matter, of equal densily at all equal distunces from the s centre, will be in equilibrio, and will have no tendenty è to move in any direction. RemarkThe equality oſ the gravitation to the surſace e d and to the surſace.) is afſirmed, because the numbers of particles in the two surfaces are inversely as the gravitations towards one in each. For the very same reason, the gravitations to the surſaces e d, and qꝗr, and t5, are all equal. Hence may be derived an elementary proposition, which is oſ great use in all inquiries oſ this kind, namely, 224. If a ne or pyramid d ꝓ æ, of uniform gravitating matter, be divided by parallel sections, d ],  r, &e. the gravitation of a particle p in the vertex to each of those sections is the same, and the gravitations to the solids pq, pde, qd er, &e. are proportional to their lengths Pq, p d, q d, &. The first part of this proposition is already demonstratedl. Now, conceive the cone to be thus divided into mnumerable slices of equal thicknesss It is plain, that the gravitation to each of these is the same, and therefore the gravitation to the solid ꝗ pr is to the gravitation to the solid q d er as the number of slices in the first to the number in the second, that is, as ꝑ ꝗ, the length oſ the first, to q d, the length of the second. The cone d ꝑe was supposed extremely slender. This was not necessary for the demonstration of the particular case, where all the sections were paralle. But in this elementary proposition, the angle at ꝓ is supposed smaller than any assigned angle, that the eone or pyramid may be considered as one oſ the elements into which we may resolve a body of any form. In this resolution, the bases are supposed, if not otherwise expressly stated, to be parallel, and perpendicular to the axes; indeed they are supposed to be portions æ r, ye, æi, &e. of spherical surſaces, having their centres in 2. The small portions æ r q, y e d, =i3, &e. are held as insignificant, vanishing in the ultimate ratios of the whole solids. It is easy, also, to see, that the equilibrium of ꝓ is not limited to the case of a spherical shell, but will hold true of any body composed of parallel strata, or strata so formed that the lines ꝓd, ꝑò are cut in the same proportion by the sections d ę, ? r, &e. In a spheroidal shell, for example, vhose innmer and outer surfaces are similar, and similarly posited spheroids, the particle ꝓ will be in equilibrio any where within it, because, in this case, the lines , and ne are equal; so are the lines ꝓ: and o d, the lines t and re, the lines s5: and q d, &e. In most cases, however, there is but one situation of the particle ꝓ that will ensure this equilibrium. But we may, at the same time, infer the following very useful proposition. 225. If there be two solids perfectly similar, and of ihæ same uniform density, the gravitation to each of these lids, by a particle similarly placed on or in each, is proportional to any homologous lines of the solids. For, the solids being similar, they may be resolved into the same number of similar pyramids similarly placed in the solidss. The gravitations to each of any corresponding pair of pyramids are proportional to the lengths of those pyramids. These lengths have the same proportion in every corresponding pair. Therefore the absolute gravitations to the whole pyramids of one solid has the same ratio to the absolute gravitation to the whole pyramids of the other solidc. And, since the solids are similar, and the particles are at the similarly placed vertexes of all the similar and similarly placed pyramids, the gravitation compounded of the absolute gravitations to the pyramids oſ one solid has the same ratio to the gravitation similarly compounded of the absolute gravitations to the pyramids of the other. 206. The grovitation of an eæternal particle io a spherical surfuce, shell, or entire sphere, which is equally dense at all equal distunces from the centre, is the same as if the whole matter were collected in its centre. Let ALBM (Fig. 21.) represent such a sphere, and let P be the external particlee. Drawv P A CB through the centre C of the sphere, and eross it by LCM at right angles Draw two right lines PD, P E, containing a very small angle at P, and cutting the great circle ALBM in D, E, , E. About P as a centre, with the distance P C, deseribe the arch Cd m, cutting D P in d, and EP in . About the same centre describe the arce DO. Drav d P, e G purallel to AB, and cutting I. C in f and L. Drav CK perpendicular to P D, and d H, D3, and FI, perpendicular to AB. Join CD and CF. Nov, let the figure be supposed to turn round the axis P B. The semicircumſerence A L B will generate a complete spherical surfuce The arch C d m vill generate another spherical surface, having P ſor its centree The small arches D E, d e, F G vill generate rings or zones oſ thos spherical surſaces. D O vill also generate a zone of a surface, having P for its centre: ſg& and F I vill generate zones oſ flat cireular surfaces. It is evident, that the zones generated by D E and DO (Which we may eall the zones D E and D O), having the same radius D3, are to each other as their respective breadths D E and DO. In like manner, the zones generated by d e, 75, FI, FG, being all at the same distance from the axis AB, are also as their respective breadths de, fg FI, F G. But the zone DO ĩs to the zOne d e as PD to Pd'. For DO is to dæ as P D 0 P d, and the radius oſ rotation Dò iĩs to the radius d H, also as P D to Pd. The circumſferences described by DO and de are thereſore in the same proportion of P D to P d. Therefore the zones, being as their breadths and as their circumſerences jointly, are as P D? and P à CK and d H, being the sines of the same arch C d, are equal. Thereſore XD and F, the halves oſ chords equally distant from the centre, are also equal. Therefore the triangles CD K and C F⸗ are equal and similar. But C DXis similar to E D O. For the right angles P D O and C D E are equal. Taking away the common angle CDO, the remainders C D K and E D O are equal. In like manner, CF* and GF I are similar, and therefore (since CDK and CF5 are similar) the elementary triangles E DO and G F I are similar, and DO: D E FI: FG. The absolute gravitation or tendency oſ P to the zone DO is equal to its absolute gravitation to the zone d e, because the number oſ particles of the ſirst is to the number in the last in P D' to P db, that is, inversely, as tho gra- vitation to a particle in the first to the gravitation to a particle in the last. Therefore let c express the circumſerence oſ a cirele vhose radius is . The surface of the zone generated by D O vill be DO x c x D3, and the O ; gravitation to it will be DO Læ2 to which de x c x dHde x c x dH. . P , o4ſis equal. This expresses the ahsolute gravitation to the zone generated by D O, this gravitation being exerted in the direction P D. But it is evident that the tendency of P, arising ſrom its gravitation to every particle in the zone, must be in the direetion PC. The oblique gravitation must therefore be estimated in the direction P C, and must be reduced, in the proportion of P d to P H. It is plain that Pd: PH æde: fę, because d e and fg are perpendicular to P d and P H. Therefore the reduced or central gravitation of P to the zone generated by D O will be expressed pyſgæææ d H vœ d H But the gravitation to the zone generated by D O is to the gravitation to the zone generated by D E, as DO to DE, that is, as F I (or ſę) to FG. Thereſore the central gravitation to the zone generated by D E will be exFGxc x dH d H Now F G x c x d H is the value of the surface of the zone generated by F G. And if all this matter were collected in C, the gravitation of P FG xc x dH P the direction P C. Hence it follows, that the central gravitation oſ P to the zone generated by DE, is the same as its gravitation to all the matter in the zone generated by FG, if that matter were placed in C. What has been demonstrated respecting the arch D E, is true of every portion of the circumſerencee Each has a pressed by to it would be exactly , and it would be in substitute FG, which being placed in the centre C, the gravitation of P is the same. IF PT touch the sphere in T, every portion of the arth TL B vill have its substitute in the quadrant L B, and every part of the arch AT has its substitute in the quadrant ATL, as is easily seen. And hence it fſollows, that the gravitation of a particle P to a spherical surface ALBM is the same as if all the matter oſ that surface were collected in its centre. We see, also, that the gravitation to the surſace generated by the rotation of AT round AB is equal to the gravitation to the surſace generated by TL B, which is mnuch larger, but more remote. What we have now demonstrated with respeet to the surſace generated by the semicircle AL B is equally true with regard to the surface generated by any concentrie semicirele, such as a Ib. It is true, therefore, in regard to the shell comprehended between those surfaces; for this shell may be resolved into innumerable concentrie strata, and the proposition may be affirmed with respeet to each of them, and therefore with respeet to the whole And this will still be true, if the whole sphere be thus occupied. Lastly, it follows, that the proposition is still true, although those strata should differ in density, provided that each stratum is uniformly dense in every part. It may therefore be affirmed, in the most general terms, that a particle, P, placed without a spherical surface, shell, or entire sphere, equally dense at equal distances from the centre, tends to the centre with the same ſorce as if the vhole matter of the surſace, shell, or sphere, were collected there. This will be found to be a very important proposition, greatly assisting us in the explanation of abstruse phenomena in other departments of natural philosophy. 21. The gravitation of an external particle to a spherical surface, shell, or entire sphere, of uniform density, at equal distances Srom the centre, is as the quantity of mat6 ter in that body, directly, and as the squore of the distance srom its centre, inversely. For if all the matter were collected in its centre, the gravitation would be the same, and it would then vary in the inverse duplicate ratio of the distance. 228. Cor. l. Particles placed on the surface of spheres of equal density, gravitate to the centres of those spheres vith forces proportional to the radii of the spheres. For the quantities of matter are as the cubes of the a radii. Thereſore the gravitation  is as . that is, as dThis is a particular case of Prop. 225. 229. Cor. 2. The same thing holds true, if the distance of the external particles from the centres of the spheres are as the diameters or radii oſ the spheres. 230. Cor. 3. If a particle be placed within the surſac] of a sphere of uniſorm density, its gravitation, at diſferent distances from the centre, will be as those distancess For it ill not be aſfected by any matter of the sphere that is more remote ſrom the centre (468.); and its gravitation to what is less remote is as its distance from the centre by the last corollary. 231. The mutual grovitation of tuo spheres of uniform density in their concentric strata is in the inverse duplicale ratio of the distance between their centres. For the gravitation of each particle in the sphere A to to the sphere B, is the same as if all the matter in B were collected at its centree. Suppose it 50 placedl. The gravitation oſ B io A vill be the same as if all the matter in A were collected in its centre Therefore it ill be as d' inversely. But the gravitation of A to B is equal to that of B to A Thereſore, &e. 232. The absolute gravitation oſ two spheres, whose quantities of matter are a and b, and d the distance of their tre is at For the tendency oſ one particle oſ a 5  b, being the aggregate oſ its tendencies to every particle oſ b, is 2 Therefore the tendency oſ the whole of a o b must be _ And the tendency of b to a is equal to that of a to b. 238. This consequence of a mutual gravitation between particles proportional to i is agreeable to what ĩs observed in the solar system. The planets are very nearly spherical, and they are observed to gravitate mutually in this proportion of the distance between their centres. This mutual action of two spheres could not result ſfrom any other lav of action between the particles. Therefore we conclude, that the particles of gravitating matter, of which the planets are ſormed, gravitate to each other according to this law, and that the observed gravitation of the planets is the united effect oſ the gravitation of each particle to each. There is just one other case, in which the lav of corpuscular action is the same vith the lav of action between the masses; and this is vhen the mutual action of the corpuscles is as their distance direetly. But no such law is observed in all the phenomena of nature. The general inference, drawn by Sir Isaac Newton from the phenomena, may be thus expressed: Every purticle of matter grovitates to every other purticle of matter with o Sorce inversely proportional to the square of the distance srom itt. Hence this doctrine has been called THE DOCTRINE OF UNIVERSAL GRAVITATION. The description of a conic section round the foeus, fully proves that this law of the distances is the law competent o all the gravitating particles But whether all particles gravitate, and gravitate alike, is no? demonstrated. The analogy between the distance of the different planets and their periodic times only proves, that the total gravitation of the different planets is in the same proportion with their Vou. III. I quantity of matter. For the force observed by us, and found to be in the inverse duplicate ratio of the distance of the planet, is the accelerating force of gravity, being measured by the acceleration which it produces in the diſferent planetss. But if one half of a planet be matter which does not gravitate, and the other half gravitates twice as much as the matter of another planet, these to planets vill still have their periods and distances agreeable to Kepler's third law. But since no phenomenon indicates any inequality in the gravitation oſ different substances, it is proper to admit its perfeet equality, and to conclude with Sir Isaac Newton. 284. The general consequence of this doctrine is, that any two bodies, at perſect liberty to move, should approach each other. This may be made the subject of experiment, in order to see whether the mutual tendencies of the planets arise from that oſ their particles. For it must still be remembered, that although this constitution of the particles will produce this appearance, it may arise from some other cause. Such experiments have accordingly been made Bodies have been suspended very nicely, and they have been observed to approach each other. But a more careful examination of all circumstances has shewn, that most of those mutual approaches have arisen ſrom other causes. Several philosophers of reputation have therefore refused to admit a mutual gravitation as a phenomenon competent to all matter. But no such approach should be observed in the experiments now alluded to. The mutual approach of two spheres A and B, at the distance D of their eentres, must be to the approach to the Earth E at the distance d of . . . AxB AXE, ſ their centres in the proportion of to that is, of jis , to z Thereſore, if a particle be placed at the sur- face oſ a golden sphere one foot in diameter, its gravitation to the Earth must be more than ten millions of times greater than its gravitation to the gold. For the diameter of the Earth is nearly forty millions of feet, and the density of gold is nearly four times the mean density oſ the Earth. And thereſore, in a second, it would approach less than the ten millionth part oſ 16 ſeeta quantity altogether insensible. IF we could employ in these experiments bodies of suſficient magnitude, a sensible effect might be expected. SupposæT (Fig. 22.) to be a hall of equal density with the Earth, and two geographical miles in diameter, and let the purticle B be at its surface Its gravity to T will be to its gravitation to the Earth nearly as I to 2300; and, thereſore, if suspended like a plummet, it vould certainly deviate lI from the perpendicula. A mountain two miles high, and hemispherical, rising in a level country, would produce the same deviation of the plummet. 235. Accordingly, such deviation of a plumb line has heen ohserved. First, by the French academicians employed to measure a degree oſ the meridian in Peru. Having placed their observatories on the north and south sides of the vast mountain Chimborao, they found, that the Plummets of their quadrants were deflected toward the mountain. Oſ this they could accurately judge, by means of the stars which they saw through the telescope of their quadrant, vhen they were pointed vertically by means of the plummet. Thus, if the plummets take the positions A B, CD, Fig. 29.) instend of hanging in the verticals A F and CH, a star I vill seem to have the zenith distances e I, I, nstead of E I, G I, which it ought to have; and the distance F H on the Earthi's surſace vill seem the measure of the difference of latitude  , whereas it corresponds to EG. The measure of a degree, including the space V , and estimated by the declination oſ a star I, Will Lę & 5 - short, and the measure oſ a degree, terminating either at F or H, vill be too long when the space F H is excluded. Considerable doubts remaining as to the inferences dravn from this observation, the philosophers were very desirous of having it repeatedl. For this reason, our Sovereign. George III. ever zealous to promote true seience, sent the royal astronomer, Dr Maskelyne, to Seotland, to make this experiment on the north and south sides of Shihallien, a loſty and solid mountain in Perthshiree The deviation toward the mountain on each side exceeded 7; thus confirming, beyond doubt, the noble discovery oſf our illustrious countryman. Perhaps a very sensible effect might be observed at Annapolis- Royal, in Nova Scotia, from the vast addition of matter brought on the coast twice every day by the tides. The water rises there above a hundred feet at spring-tide Iſ a leaden pipe, a ſew hundred feet long, were laid on the level beach, at right angles with the coast, and a glass pipe set upright at each end, and the whole filled with vater; the vater vill rise at the outer end, and sink at the end next the land, as the tide risess Such an alternate change of level would give the most satisſactory evidence Perhaps the efſect might be sensible on a very long plummet, or even a nice spirit level 236. A very fine and satisſfactory examination was made in 1788 hy Mr H. Cavendish. Two leaden halls were fastened to the ends of a slender deal rod, which was suspended horizontally at its middle by a fine wiree This arm, aſter oscillating some time horizontally by the twisting and untwisting of the wire, came to rest in a certain position. Two great masses of lead vere now brought vithin a proper distance oſ the two suspended balls, and their approach produced a deviation of the arms from the points of rest. By the extent of this deviation, and by the times oſ the oscillations vhen the great masses were vithdrawn, the proportion was diseovered between the elasti- city of the wire and the gravitation of the halls to the great masses; and a medium of all the ohservations was taken. By5 these experiments, the mutual gravitation of terrestrial matter, even at considerable distances, vas most eviningly demonstrated; and it was legitimately deduced from them, that the medium density of the Earth was more than five times the density of water. These curious and valuable experiments are narrated in the Philosophical Transactions for 17985. 2237. The oblate form of the Earth also affords another proof that gravity is directed, not to any singular point within the Earth, but that its direction is the combined eſfeet oſ a gravitation to every particle of matter. Were gravity directed to the centre, by any peculiar virtue oſ that point, then, as the rotation takes away ,1, oſ the gravity at the equator, the equatorial parts of a fluid sphere must rise one-half of this, or z14, beſore all is in equilibrio. For suppose CN and C Q (Fig. 5.) to be two camals reaching from the pole and from the equator to the centre. Since the diminution of gravity at Q is observed to be ,1,, and the gravitation of every particle in CQ is diminished by rotation in proportion to its distance from the axis of rotation, the diminution oceasioned in the weight oſ the whole canal will be one-half of the diminution it would sustain, iſ the weight oſ every particle were as much diminished as that of the particle Q iss Thereſore the canal presses less on the centre by 1;, and must be lengthened 30 much before it will balance NC, which sustains no diminution of weightt. Every other canal parallel to CQ sustains a similar loss of weight, and must be similarly compensatedl. This vill produce an elliptieal spheroidal form. DBut the equatorial parts of our globe are much mor elevated than thisnot less than 52. The reason Is th, When the rotation of the Earth has raised the equatò; nomena that he discovers itt. The only discovery to which he professes to have any claim is, 1st, the matter of ſaet, that every hody in the solar system is continually deflected toward every other body in it, and that the defleetion of any mdividual body A toward any other body B, is observed to be in the proportion of the quantity oſ matter in B directly, and of the square of the distance AB inversely; and, 2quily, that the ſalling of terrestrial bodies is just a particular example of this universal defſlectionn. He employs this discovery to explain phenomena that are more particular; and all the explanation that he gives of these is, the shewing that they are modified cases of this general phenomenon, oſf which he knows no explanation but the mere deseription. Newton was not more eminent for mathematical genius and penetrating judgment, than for logeal accurac He uses the word gravitation as the expression, not oſ a quality, but of a fact; not of a eause, but of an event. Having established this fact beyond the power of controversy, by an induetion suſficiently copious, nay, vithout a single exeeption, he explains the more particular phenomena, by shewing, with what modiſications, arising from the circumstances of the case, they are ncluded m the general fact of mutual deflection; and, ſinally, as all changes of motion are conceived by us as the effects of force, he says, that there is a deſlecting force eontinually acting on every particle of matter in the solar system, and that this deflecting force is what we call weight, heaviness. Few persons think themselves chargeable with absurdity, or with the abetting of occult qualities, vhen they really consider the heaviness oſ a body as one of its properties. So far from being occult, it seems one of the most manifest. Jt is not the heaviness of this body that is the occult quality; it is the cause of this heaviness. In thus considering gravity as competent to all matter, Newton does no thing that is not done by others, vhen they aseribe im pulsiveness or inertia to matte. Without sruple. "”e particle b at a distance ſfrom it, hardly any person will say that he makes this assertion from a clear perception oſ the absurdity of the contrary proposition. Should a person say that the mere presence of the partiele b is a sufficient reason for a approaching it, it ill be difficult to prove the assertion to be absurd. 2389. Such, however, has been the general opinion of philosophers; and numberless attempts have been made to thrust in some material agent in all the cases of seeming action at a distance Hence the hypotheses of magnetical and electrical atmospheres; hence the vortexes of Des Cartes, and the celestial machinery of Eudoxus and Callippus. Of all those attempts, perhaps the most rash and unjustifiable is that oſ Leibnit, published in the Leipæig Acts, 1689, two years after the publication of Newton's Principia, and of the review of it in those very acts. It may be called rash, hecause it trusted too much to the deference which his own countrymen had hitherto shevn for his opinions. In this attempt to account for the elliptical motion of the planets, Leibuitæ pays no regard to the acknovledged laws of motion. He assumes as principles oſ explanation, motions totally repugnant to those laws, and motions and tendencies incongruous and contradictory to each other. And then, by the help of geometrical and analytical errors, which compensate each other, he makes out a strange conclusion, which he calls a demonstration of the law of planetary gravitation; and says, that he sees that this theorem is known to Mr Newton, but that he cannot tell how he has arrived at the knowledge of it. This is something very remarkablee Newton's process is suſficiently pointed out in the Acta Eruditorum, vhich M. Leibnit7 acknowledges that he had seen. A copy oſ the Principia was sent to him, by order oſ the Royal Society, in less than two months aſter the publicationIt was soon known over all Europe. It is without the least ſoundation that the partisans oſ without an action è disianti, even between the adjoining particles, is inconceivable What is meant by elasticity? Surely such a constitution of the assemblage oſ particles as makes them recede from each other; and the absurdity is as great at the distance of the millionth part of a hairs breadth as at the distancæ of a million oſ leagues. If we attempt to evade this; by saying that the particles are in contact, and are elastic, ve must grant that they are compressible, and are really compressed, oſhiervise they are not exerting any elastic force; thereſore they are dimpled, ànd eàn no more constitute a fluid than so many blown bladders compressed in æa box. The last attempt of this kind that shall be mentioned, is that of M. Le Sage of Geneva, put into a better shape by M. Prevòt, in a Memoir published by the Academy oſ Berlin, under the uame of Leuorece Neutonien. This philosopher supposes that through every point of space there is eontinually passing a stream of æther in ævery direetion, vith immense rupidityn This will produeæ no eſfect on a solitary body; but if there are two, one of them intercepts purt of the strenm which would have acted on the other. TPherefore the hodies, being less impelled on that side which faces the other, will move toward eãch other. Le Sage adds some cireumstances repeeting the strueture oſ the bodies, vhich may give a sort of progression in the intensity of the impulse, vhich may produce a deſlection diminishing as the distance or its squãre inoreases. But this hiypothesis also requires that we make ſight of the acknowledged laws of motion. It has other insuperable diſfioulties, and, s0 ſar from aſfording any cvplanation of the plunetary motions, its most triſling cireumstance is incomparably more dificult 10 comprehend, or even 10 conceive than the most trieate phenomenon in astronomy. 241. Indeed this difficulty obtains in every attempt of ihe kind, it being necessaty to consider the combined mo tion of millions of bodies, in order to explain the motiò; . one. But such hypotheses have a worse fault than their difficulty; they transgress a great rule oſ philosophical disquisition, never to admit as the cause of a phenomenon any thing of vhich we do not know the existence For, even iſ the legitimate cnsequences of the hypothesis were agreeable to the phenomena, this only shews the possibility oſ the theory, but gives no explanation whatever. The hypothesis is good, only as far as it agrees with the phenomena; ve thereſore understand the phenomena as ſar as we understand the explanation. The observed laws oſ the phenomena are as extensive as our explanation, and the hypothesis is uselesss But, alas none of those hypotheses agree, in their legitimate consequences, with the phenomena; the lavs of motion must be thrown aside, in order io employ them, and new laws must be adopted. This is unvise; it were much better to give those pro re nata laws to the planets themselves. Mr Cotes, a philosopher and geometer of the ſirst eminence, wrote a preface to the second edition of the Principia, which was published in 1713 with many alterations and improvements by the author. In this preface Mr Cotes gives an excellent account of the principles of the Newtonian philosophy, and many very pertinent remarks on the maxim which made philosophers so adverse to the admission of attracting and repelling forces. Whatever may have been Newton's sentiments in early life about the competency of an elastic æther to account for the planetary deflections, he certainly put little value on it aſterwards. For he never made any serious use oſ it for the explanation of any phenomenon susceptible of mathematical discussion He had certainly rejected all such hypotheses, otherwise he never would have permitted Mr Pemberton to prefix that preface of Mr Cotes to an edition carried on under his own eye.. For in this preface the absurdity oſ the hypothesis oſ an elastic æther is completely exposed, and it is declared to be a contrivance altogether unworthy of a philosopher. Yet, when Mr Cotes died soon aſter, Sir Isaac Newton spoke oſ him in terms of the highest respeet. Alas I said he, we have lost Mr Cotes; had he lived, we should soon have learned something excellent. At present the most eminent philosophers and mathematicians n Europe proſess the opinion of Mr Cotes, and see no validity in the philosophical maxim that bodies eannot act at a distance M. de la Place, the excellent commentator of Newton, and who has given the finishing stroke to the universality of the influence of gravitation on the planetary motions, by explaining, by this principle, the secular equation of the Moon, which had resisted the efſorts of all the mathematicians, endeavours, on the contrary, to prove that an action in the inverse duplicate ratio of the distances results ſrom the very essence or existence of matter. Some remarks vill be made on this attempt oſf M. de la Place aftervards But at present we shall find it much more conducive to our purpose to avid altogether this metaphysical question, and strietly o ſollow the example of our illustrious Instruetor, vho clearly saw its absolute insignificance for increasing our kno wledge of Nature. Newton-saw that any inquiry into the manner of acting ofſ the efficient cause of the planetary deſlections was altogether unnecessary for acquiring a complete knowledge of all the phenomena depending on the law which he had so happily discovered. Such was its perfect simplicity, that e wanted nothing but the assurance of its constancyan assurance established on the exquisite agreement of phenomena vith every legitimate deduetion from the lav. Even Newton's perspicacious mind did not see the number of important phenomena that were completely explained by it, and he thought that some would be found which required the admission oſ other principless But the first mathematicians of Europe have acquired most deserved ſame in the cultivation of this philosophy, and in their ſrogress have found that there is not one appearance n th dueæed by a force which is external to the system and acts equally and in the same direction on every hody of the system. 248. A ſorce has been discovered pervading the whole system, and determining or regulating the motions of every individual body in it. The problem which naturally offers itsælſ first to our discussion is, to ascertain what will be the motion of a body, projected from any given point of the solar system, in any particular direction, and with any particular velocitywhat will be the form of its path, ho ill it move in this path, and where will it be at any instant we choose to name ? Sir Isaac has given, in the 4lst proposition of his first book, the solution of this problem, in the most general terms, not limited to the observed law of gravitation, but extended to any conceivable relation between the distances and the intensity of the forcee This is, unquestionably, the most sublime problem that can be proposed in mechanical philosophy, and is well known by the name oſ the INvERSE PROBLEM OF CENTRIPETAL FORCES. But, in this extent, it is a problem oſ pure dynamies, and does not make a part oſ physical astronomy. Our attention is limited to the centripetal force which connects this part of the creation of God—a foree inversely proportional to the square of the distances. It may be stated as follows. Let a body P, (Fig. 23.) which gravitates to the Sun in S, be projected in the direction PN, vith the velocity which the gravitation at P to the Sun would generate in it by impelling it along P T, less than P S. Draw P Q perpendicular to PN. Take P O ęqual to twice PT, and drav O Q perpendicular to P Q, and QR perpendicular to P S. Also drav P5, making the angle QP⸗ equal to QP S. Join S Q, and produce S Q till it meet P⸗ in s. The body will describe an ellipsis, which P N touches in P, whose foci are 8 and 5, and vhose prineipal paramele is twice P R. For, drav S N perpendicular to PN. Make P Oæ 2PO or =4PT, and drav O Q perpendicular to PO, und describe a circle passing through P, O and Q. It vill touch PN, because P O Q was made a right angle, and thereſore P Q is the diameter of the cirele: We know that an ellipse may be described by a body influenced by gravitation. This ellipse may have S and⸗ for its foci, and P N for a tangent in P, because the angle are equal which P N makes vith the two focal lines. This being the case, ve know that if P Q, OQ, and QR, be drawn as directed in the foregoing construetion, P O Q is the cirele which has the same curvature with the ellipse in P, whose foci are S and 5, and tangent P N, and P Tis one-fourth of the chord of curvature in P, and P R is half the parameter oſ the ellipse Therefore PT is the space along which the body must be uniformly impelled by the force in P, that it may acquire the velocity with which the body, actually describing this ellipse, passes through P. If this body, which ve shall call A, thus revolves in an ellips, we should infer that it is deflected toward S, by a force inversely proportional to the square of its distance from S, and oſ such magnitude in P, that it would generate the velocity with which the hody passes through P, by uniſormly impelling it along P T. Now, the other body (Which we shall call P) was actually. projected in the direction P N, that is, in the direction oſ As motion, with the very velocity with which A passes through P in the same direction, and it is under the influence of a ſorce precisely the same that must have influenced A in the same placee The two bodies A and P are therefore in precisely the same mechanical condition; in the or moving in the same direction; with the same 3 deſlected by the same intensity of ſorce, acting i Adirectionn. Their motions in the next moment cannot be different, and they must, at the end oſ the moment, be again in the same condition; and this must continue. A deseribes a certain ellipse; P must deseribe the same; for two motions that are different cannot result from the same force acting in the same circumstances. This demonstration is given by Sir Isane Newton in four lines, as a eorollary from the proposition in which he deduces the law of planetary deflection from the motion in a conic sectionn. But it seemed necessary here to expand his process oſ reasoning a little, because the validity oſ the inference has been denied by Mr John Bernoulli, one of the first mathematicians of that age. He even hinted that Newton had taken that illogical method, hecause he eould not accommodate his 4lst proposition to the particular lav of gravitation observed in the system. And he claims to himself the honour of having the ſirst demonstrated that a centripetal force, inversely as the square of the distance, necessarily produces a motion in a conie sectionn. The argument by which he supports this bold claim is very singular, coming from a consummate mathematician, vho could not be ignorant of ĩts nullity; so that ĩit was not a serious argument, but a triek to eateh the uninſformed. Newton, says he, might with equal propriety have inferred, from the description of the logarithmic spiral by a body influenced by àa foree inversely proportional to the cube oſ the distance, that a hody so deflected vill deseribe the logarithmic spiral, whereis we know that it may describe the hyperbolie spiral. Not satisſied with this triumph, he attacks Nevton's process in his 4lst or general proposition of central forees, saying that it is deduced from principles foreign to the question; and, aſjęr all, does not exhibit the body in a state of continued motion, but merely informs us vhere it vill be ſound, and in what condition, in any assigned moment. He concludes by vaunting his own process as accomplishing all that can be wanting in the problem. These assertions are the most unfounded and 1,;ld Vou. III. K vauntings of this vainglorious mathematician; and his oWn solution is a maniſfest plagiarism ſrom the writings o Newton, except in the method taken by him to demonstrate the lemma which he as well as Newton premisess. Newton's demonstration oſ this lemma is by the purest principles of free curvilineal motion; and it is, in this respect, a benutiful and original propositionn. Bernoulli considers it as synonymous with motion on an inclined plane; with which it has no analogyg. The solution of the great problem by Bernoulli is, in every principle, and in every step, the same with Newton's; and the only difference is, that Newton employs a geometrical, and Bernoulli an algebraical expression oſ the proceeding. Newton exhibits oontinued motion, whereas Bernoulli employs the differential caculus, which essentially exhibits only a succession of points of the path. Tt is, worth the students vhile to read Dr Keill's Letter to John Bernoulli, and his examination of this boasted solution of the celebrated problem. But it is still more worth his while to read Newtons solution, and the propositions in MLaurins Fluxions and Hermanns Phoronomia, which are immediately connected vith this problemm This reading will greatly conduce to the forming a good taste in disquisitions of this kind.* 244. Our occupation at present is much more limited. We are chieſly interested to shew that gravitation produces an elliptical motion, when the space PT, along which the body must be uniformly impelled by the force as it exists in P, in order to acquire the velocity of projection, is less than PS. But every step would have been the same, had ve made P T equal to PS (as in Fig. 24.) But we * The propositions given by M. de Moivre in No 352. of the Philosophical Transactions, and those by Dr Keill in No 317. and 340. are peculiarly simple and good. should then have found that when the angle Q P ⸗ is made equal io QP S, the line P 5 vill be parallel to S Q, so that S Q vill not intersect it, and the path will not have another focus. It is a parabola, of which P R is the principal parameter. . We shall also find that if PT be made greater than  (as in Fig. 5.) the line P (making the angles  S and QP 5 equal) will cut SQ on the other side of S, so that S and 5 are on the same side of Q. The path vill be a hyperbola, of which PR is the principal parameter. 246. This restriction to the conic sections plainly follows from the line P R, the third proportional to P O and P Q, being the principal parameter, whether the path be an ellipse, parabola, hyperbola, or circle.* * The ouly difficulty in the inference of a conic section as the necessary path of a projectile influenced by a force in the inverse duplicate ratio of the distance from the centre, has arisen from the practice of ihe algebraic analysts, of defining all curve lines by the relation of an abscisa to parallel ordinates. But this is by no means necessary; and all curves which enclose space, are as naturally referable to a focus, and definable by the relation between the radii and a circular arch. An equation expressing the focal chord of curvature is as distinetive as the usual equation, and lends us with ease to the chief properties of the figuree. Therefore Let S P, the given distance, be a, and any indeterminate distance be z Let the perpendicular S N (also given by S P and the given angle SPN) be b, and let 2 be the perpendicular and ꝗ the focal chord of curvature, corresponding to the distance æ. Tet 4 PT be æ d. Then we have thereſore -T adx5  which is an equation to a cnie section, Let I d =e then - æ It remains to point out the general circumstances oſ ihis elliptieal motion, and their physical connexions. For this purpose, the following proposition is useſul 27. When a body desceribes any eurve line B DP A (Fig. 26.) by means of a deſlecting force directed to a ſocus B, the angle 8 P N, vhich the radius vector makes with the direction oſ the motion, diminishes, iſ the velocity in the point P be less than what would enable the body to describe a circle round S, and increases, iſ the velocity be greater. If the velocity oſ the body in P be less than that which might produce a cireular motion round S, then its path will conlesce with the nascent arch Pꝓ of a circle whose deflective chord of curvature is less than Z P S. Let its half be P O, less than PS, and let Pꝓ be a very minute arch. Drav the tangents P N, pn and the perpendiculars S N, Sn. Pq perpendicular to PN vill meet ꝓ q perpendicular to ꝓn (P ꝓ being evanescent) in q the centre of curvature Drav ꝓ S and ꝓO. It is evident that the angles P  and P o p ure ultimately equal, as they stand on the same arch Pꝓ of the equicurve circle, and are, respectively, the doubles of the angles at the circumference. P qꝑ is evidently equal N Sn. Therefore P Oꝑ is equal to NS n, and PS  is less than N S n. Therefore P S N is less than ꝓ S n, and SPN is greater than S ꝓ nn Therefore the angle S PN diminishes when P O is less than PS, that is, vhen the velocity in P is less than what would enable the centripetal foree in P to retain the body in a cirele round S. of which e is the parameter, S the focus, and P N a tangent in P. Nov e is a given magnitude, because a, b, d, are all given. Expresing the angle S P N by 9, we have e  d x sin.? 2. See also for the particular case of a foree proportional to p the dissertations by Dr Keill in the Phil. Trans. No 317. and No 5340. On the other hand, if the velocity in P be greater than what suits a circular motion round S, iĩt is plain that ? O vill be greater than PS, and the angle P S ꝓ will be greater than N S n, and the angle P S N greater than P S n, and thereſore the angle 8 P N vill be less than S ꝓn, &ec. 248. Applying this observation to the case of elliptical motion, ve get a more distinct notion of its different aſſetions, and their dependance on their physical causes. In the half DA B (Fig. 18) of the ellipse described by a planet round the Sun in its focus S, the middle point of the deflective or focal chord of curvature lies between the planet and the ſocus. Therefore, during the whole motion from D to B, along the semiellipse D A B, the angle contained between the radius vector and the line of the planets motion is eontinually diminishing. But during the motion i the semiellipse, B P D, the angle is continually increasing. It is thereſore the greatest possible in D, and the smallest in B. Let the planet set out ſrom its aphelion A, vith ĩts due velocity, moving in the direction AF. The velocity in A, being equal to that acquired by a uniform acceleration along one-fourth of the parameter, is vastly less than what would make it move in the circular arch A L, of which S is the centre, and the planet must fall within that cirele. Thereſore its path will no longer be perpendicular to the radius vector, but must now make vith it an angle somevhat acute. The centripetal force therefore is now resolvable into two forces, one of which accelerates the planets motion, and the other incurvates its path. Its direction brings it nearer to the Sun. While in the quadrant A F B, the veloeity is always less than what is required for a cireular motion. For, if from any point F in this quadrant, F G be dravn perpendicular to the tangent, meeting the transverse axis in G, and if GH be drawn perpendicular o the normal F G, H F is one halſ of the ſocal chord of curvature, and H lies between P and S. Now, it has been shewn that when this is the case, the angle S F n diminishes, and, vith it, the ratio of S n to S F (this ratio is that of CB to the semidiameter C O, the conjugate of CF. Consequently, there will be continually more and more of the centripetal force employed in accelerating the motion, and less employed in incurvating the path, the finst part being F n and the other S n. When the planet arrives at B, the point H ſalls upon S, and the velocity is precisely what would suſfice ſor a cireular motion round S, if the direction of the motion were perpendicular to the radius vector. But the direction of the motion brings it still nearer to S. A great part oſ the centripetal force is still employed in accelerating the motion; and the moment the planet passes B, the velocity becomes greater than what might produce a circular motion round S. For H nov lies beyond S from B. Thereſore the angle S B N, vhich is now in its smallest possible state, begins to open again; and this diminishes the proportion of the centripetal ſorce which accelerates the motion, and increases the proportion of the incurvating forcee. The planet is, however, still accelerated, preserving the equable description of areas. The augle S BN increases with the increasing velocity, and becomes a right angle, vhen the planet arrives at its perihelion P. It is shewn, by writers on the conic sections, that the chord P I cut off from any diameter P A by the equicurve circle Pa I, is equal to the parameter oſ that diameter. Therefore the centre o of this cirele lies beyond S. The planet, passing through P, is describing a nascent arch of this circle Consequently, the curve which it is describing passes without a cirele deseribed round S, and the planet is now receding from the Sun. This is usually accounted ſor, by saying that its velocity is now too great for describing o circle round the Sun. And this is true, when the intensity of the deſlecting ſorce is considered. But it has been thought diſficult to account for the planet nov retiring from the Sun, in the perihelion, where the centripetal force is the greatest oſ allgreater than what has already been able to bring it continually nearer to the Sun. We are apt to expect that it will come still nearer. But the faet ĩs, that the planet, in passing through P, is really moving, so that, if the Sun were suddenly transferred to o, it would cireulate round it for ever. But, in describing the smallest portion of the cirele P a I, it goes without the circle which has S for its centre, and its motion now makes an obtuse angle vith the radius vector, although it is perpendicular to a radius drawn to o. There is now a portion of the centripetal ſorce employed in retarding the motion of the planet, and ĩts velocity is now diminished; and the angle of the radius vector and the path is now increased, by the same degrees by which they had been inereased and diminished during the approach to the Sun. At D, the planet has the same distance ſrom the Sun that it had in B, and the same velocity. The angle S D9 is now as much greater than a right angle as S BN was less; and at A, it is reduced to a right angle, and the velocity is again the same as the ſirst. In this way the planet will revolve for ever. It was shewn in Dynamics, that in the curvilineal motion of bodies by the action of a central force, the velocities are inversely as the perpendiculars from the centre of forces on the lines of their directionss In the perihelion, the radius vector is perpendicular to the path. The perihelion distance may thereſore be taken as the unit oſ the scale on vwhich all the other velocities are measured. The other velocities may therefore be considered as ſractions oſ the perihelion velocity, which is the greatest of all. In elliptical motions, the velocities in every point are as the perpendiculars drawn from the other focus on the tangents in that point. For the perpendiculars on any tangent dravn from the two foci are reciprocal. 249. Hence it appears that if a body sets out ſrom P, vith the velocity acquired by uniſorm acceleration along P S, and describes a parabola by means of a centripetal ſorce directed to S, the velocity diminishes without limit. For the perpendicular dravn from the focus on a tangent to a parabola may be greater than any line that can be assigned, if the point in the parabola be taken suſficiently remotę from the vertex. 250. If the body set out ſfrom P with a velocity exeeeding what it would acquire by uniform acceleration along P S, it will describe a hyperbola, and its velocity ill diminish continually. But it will never be less than a certain determinable magnitude, to which it continually approximates. For the perpendicular from the focus on the tangent in the most remote point of the hyperbola that can be assigned, is still less than the perpendicular to the assymptote, to which the tangent continually approaches. But, when the velocity in the perihelion is less than that acquired by uniform acceleration along PS, there will always be a limit to its diminution by the recess from the centre of forc. For the velocity being so moderate, the path is more incurvated by the centripetal force; so that the body is made to describe a curve which has an upper apsis A, as vell as a lower apsis P. The body, aſter passing through A at right angles to the radius vector, is now accelerated, because its path now makes an acute angle vith the radius vector; and thus the velocity is again increased. 251. The velocity in any point of the ellipse deseribed by a planet is to the velocity that would enable the same force to retain it in a circle at the same distance, in the subduplicate ratio oſ its distance from the upper focus ſ to the semitransverse axis. That is, calling the elliptic velocity V, and the cireular velocity v, we have V: & =P 1: CA. Fig. æ6.) For ?50.) V2: n/PO: PS. But by conic sections it is shewn that PO x CA is equal D CK: æPS X P5. Thereſore PO: PS æPę: CA md V:  / P5: CA 252. The angular motion in the ellipse is to the angular motion in a circle at the same distance, and by the action of the same ſorce, in the subduplieate ratio of half the parameter to the distance from S. Take P ꝓ, a small arch of the ellipse, and, ith the centre S, and distance S P, describe the cireular arch P æ V, cutting Sp in 2z: Make Pꝑ to PV as the velocity in the elſipse to that in the circle Then it is plain that P æ is to PV as the angular motion in the ellipse is to the angular motion in the circle. The angle æP ꝓ being the complement of NPS (because NP may be considered as coinciding vith P) it is equal io NSP. Thereſore, Pæ: Pp? =m SN: SP?, / PQ': PO therefore Pæ: Pp /PR: PO but Pp : PV: /PO: PS therefore Pæ: PV: æPR: PS. Cor. The angular motion in the circle exceeds that in the ellipse, vhen the point R lies between P and S, and ſalls short of it vhen R lies beyond S. They are equal when PS is perpendiceular to AC, or when the true anomaly of the planet is 90. For then R and S coincide. Here the approach to S is most rapid. 253. In any point of the ellipse, the gravitation or centripetal force is to that which would produce the same angular motion in a cirele, at the same distance from the Sun, as this distance is to half the parameter, that is, as PS to PR. For, by the last proposition, when the forces in the circle and ellipse are the same, the angular motion in the cirdle was to that in the ellipse as PV to Pæ, which has been shevn to be as VPS to VPR. Thereſore, when the angolar velocity n the cirele, and consequently the real velocity, is changed from PV to Pæ, in order that it may be the same vith that in the ellipse, the centripetal ſorcæ must be changed in the proportion of PV? to Pæ, that is, of PS to PR. Therefore the foree which retains the hody in the ellipse is to that which will retain it with the same angular motion in a cirele at that distance as PS to PRThese are the chieſ affections of a motion regulated by a centripetal force in the inverse duplicate ratio of the distance from the centre of forcess The comparison of them with motions in a circle gives us, in most cases, easy means of stating every change oſ angular motion, or of approach to or recess from the centre, by means oſ any change of centripetal force, or of velocity. Such changes frequently occur in the planetary spaces: and the regular elliptical motion of any individual planet, produced by its gravitation to the Sun, is continually disturbed by its gravitation to the other planetss. This disturbance is proportional to the square of the distance from the disturbing planet inversely, and to the quantity of matter in that planet directly. Therefore, before we can ascertain the disturbance of the Earth's motion, ſor example, by the action of Jupiter, ve must know the proportion of the quantity of matter in Jupiter to that in the Sun. This may seem a question beyond the reach of human understanding. But the Newtonian philosophy furnishes us ith infallible means for deciding it. Of the Quantity of Matter in the Sun and Planets. SiNCE it appears that the mutual tendency which we have called Gravitation is competent to every particle of matter, and therefore the gravitation of a particle of matter to any mass whatever, is the sum or aggregate of its gravitation to every atom of matter in that mass,it follos, that the gravitation to the Sun or to a planet is proportional to the quantity of matter in the Sun or the planet As the gravitation may thus be computed, vhen we know the quantity of matter, so this may be computed when ve Enow the gravitation towards it. Hence it is evident, that ve can ascertain the proportion of the quantities of matter in any two bodies, iſ we know the proportion of the gravitations toward them. 254. The tendency toward a body, of which m is the quantity oſ matter, and d the distance, is . It is this tendency which produces deflection from a straight line, and it is measured by this deflectionn. Now this, in the case of the planets, is measured by the distance at which the revolution is perſormed, and the velocity oſ that revolution. We found, that this combination is expressed by the proportional equation g ,, where ꝓ is the 1m sa periodic time. Thereſore ve have n= and, conse5 quently, m d ry By this means ve can compare the quantity oſ matter in all such bodies as have others revolving round them. Thus, we may compare the Sun with the Earth, by comparing the Moon's gravitation to the Earth with the Earths gravitation to the Sun. It will be convenient to consider the Earth as the unit in this comparison with the other bodies of the system. The Sun's distance in miles is - 98726900 The Moons distance - - 2%014 The Earth's revolution (sidereal) days 365,25 The Moon's sidereal revolution (days) - ,822 95726900 x 2, 329 Therefore æioſaꝶæ 3c5,5 Ss2009. But this must be inereased by about,;, because the gravitation to the Earth is stated beyond its real value, by the supposition, that the revolution of the Moon i performea round the centre of the Earth, whereas it is really r Bun so much exceeds that of any one planet to another, that their mutual disturbances are but inconsiderable. 256. The proportion of the quantities of matter, discovered by this process of reasoning, is very different from what we should have deduced from the observed bulk of the different bodies. Thus, Saturns diameter being about ten times that oſ the Earth, we should have inſerred, that he contained a thousand times as much matter, whereas he contains only about 103 or 102. We must therefore conelude, that the densities of the Sun and planets are very different. Still taking the Earth as the unit of the scale, and combining the ratios of the bulks and the quantities of matter, ve may say, that the density of The Sun is - - 0,25 Venus - - - 1,27 Earth - - - l Mars - - -O8 Jupiter - - - 0,299 Satum -- - -DDO,I8 4 Georgian Planet- -DoODælæ It appears, by this statement, that the density oſ the planets is less, as they are more remote from the centre of revolution. Herschel's planet is an exception; but a small change on his apparent diameter, not exceeding half a second, will perfectly reconcile them. 256. Knowing the quantity oſ matter, and the diameter of the bodies of the system, we can easily tell the accelerative fſoree of gravity acting on a body at their surſaces by article 465, that is, what velocity gravity ill generate in a seeond oſ time, or how far a body vill ſall in a seeond. In like manner, we ean tell the pressure occasioned by the weight or heaviness of a body, as this may be measured by the scale of a spring steelyard, graduated by additions oſ equal known pressures. It canmot be measured by a hulance, which only compares one mass of equally heavy matter with another. - Thus, the space fallen through, and the apparent weight of a lump oſ matter, by a spring steelyard, ill be Fall in '. VWeight. At the surface oſf the Sun - 451 feett. 28,2 Earth -IG, 09 l Jupiter- 41,64 2,6 Saturn -l4 0,89 Herschel 18,7 1,16 OF the Mutual Disturbances of the Planetary Motions. 257. THE questions which occur in this department of the study are generally of the most delicate nature, and  require the most scrupulous attention to a variety of circumstances. It is not enough to know the direction and intensity of the disturbing force in every point of the planet's motionn. We must be able to collect into one aggregate the minute and almost imperceptible changes that have accumulated through perhaps a long tract of time, during which the ſorces are continually changing, both in direction and in intensity, and are frequently combined vith other forcess This requires the constant employment of the inverse method of fluxions, which is by far the most difficult department of the higher geometry, and is still in an imperſect state. These problems have been exelusively the employment of the most eminent mathematicians of Europe, the only persons who are in a condition to improve the Newtonian philosophy; and the result of their labours has shewn, in the clearest manner, its supreme excellence, and total dissimilitude to all the physical theories which have occupied the attention of philosophers before the days of the admired inventor. For the seeming anomalies that are observed in the solar system are, all oſ them, the consequences of the universal operation of one simple force, vithout the interference of any other, and are all susceptible of the most precise measurement and comparison with observation; so that what ve choose to eall anomalies, irregularities, and disturbances, are as much the result of the general pervading principle as the elliptical motions, of which they are regarded as the disturbances. It is in this part of the study, also, in which the penetrating and inventive genius of Newton appears most conspicuously. The first law of Kepler, the equable deseription of areas, led the way to all the rest, and made the detection oſ the law of planetary foree a much easier task. But the most discriminating attention was necessary for separating from each other the deviations from simple elliptical motion which result from the mutual gravitation of the planets, and a consummate knowledge of dynamies for computing and summing up all those deviationss The science was yet to create; and it is chiefly to this that the first book of Newton's great work is dedicated. He has given the most beautiful specimen of the investigation in his theory oſ the lunar inequalities. To every one who has acquired a just taste in mathematical composition, that theory will be considered as one of the most elegant and pleasing performances ever exhibited to the publiee. It is true, that it is but a commencement of a most delicate and difficult investigation, vhich has been carried to successive degrees of much greater improvement, by the unceasing labours of the first mathematicianss. But in Newton's work are to be found all the helps for the prosecution of it, and the first application of his new geometry, contrived on purpose; and all the steps of the process, and the methods oſ proceeding, are pointed out—all oſ Newton's invention, suũ mathesi fucem prœferente. It must be farther remarked, that the knowledge of the anomalies of the planetary motions is of the greatest importancee. Without a very advanced state of it, it would have been impossible to construet aceuratę tables of the Iumar motions But by the application of this theory, Mayer has constructed tables so accurate, that, by observ6 ing the distance of the Moon from a properly selected sta, the longitude may be found at sea with an exactness quit suſſicient for navigation. This method is now universlly practised on board of our East India ships. This requir such accurate theory and tables of the Moons motion, that we must at all times be able to determine her place vithin the 30th part of her own diameter. Yet the Moon is sulject to more anomalies than any other body in the slr ByStem. But the study is no less valuable to the speculative phi losopher. Few things are more pleasing than the heing uble to trace order and harmony in the midst of seeming confusion and derangement. No where, in the vide rangt of speculation, is order more completely effected. All the seeming disorder terminates in the detection of a clas of subordinate motions, which have regular periods of increase and diminution, never arising to a magnitude that makes any considerable change in the simple elliptical mtions; so that, finally, the solar system seems calculatel for almost eternal duration, without sustaining any devintion from ĩts present state that will be perceived by any besides astronomers. The display of wisdom, in the ælection of this law of mutual action, and in accommodating it to the various circumstances which contribute to this duration and constancy, is surely one oſ the most engaging objects that can attract the attention of mankind. In this elementary course of instruetion, ve eannot give a detail of the mutual disturbances of the planetary motions. Yet there are points, both in respeet of doctrine and oſ method, which may be called elementary, in relition to this particular subjeet. It is proper to consider these with some attention. 258. The regularity of the motions oſ a planet A round the Sun would not be disturbed by the gravitation of both to another planet B, if the Sun and the planet A gravitate to B with equal force, and in the same or in a parallel din rection. The disturbance arises entirely from the inequality and the obliquity oſ the gravitations of the Sun and of the planet A to B. The manner in which these disturbances may be considered, and the grounds of computation, will be more clearly understood by an example. Let S (Fig. 27.) represent the Sun, E the Earth, and J the planet Jupiterr. Let it be farther supposed (which may be done without any great error) that the Earth and Jupiter describe concentrie cireles round the Sun, and that the Sun contains 1000 times as much matter as Jupiter. Make JS to EA as the square oſf EJ to the square of SJ. Then, if we take S J to represent the gravitation of the Sun to Jupiter, it is plain that EA vill represent the gravitation of the Earth, placed in E, to Jupiterr. Draw EB, parallel and equal to JS, and complete the parallelogram E BAD. The force with which Jupiter deranges the motion of the Earth round the Sun vill be represented by ED. For the ſorce E A is equivalent to the combined forces E B and E D. But iſ the Sun and Earth were impelled only by the equal and parallel forces S J and E B acting on every partcle of each, it is plain, that their relative motons would not be aſfected (98.) It is only by the impulsion arising from the ſorce ED, that their relative situations will sustain any derangement. 259. This derangement is oſ two kinds, affecting either the gravitation oſ the Earth to the Sun, or her angular motion round him. Let ED he considered as the diagonal of a rectangle E F DG, E G lying in the direction of the radius S E, and E F being in the direction oſ the tangent 1o the Earth's orbit. It is plain that the force E G affects the Earth's gravitation to the Sun, while EF affects the motion round him. As EG is in the direction of the radius, it has no tendency to aceelerate or returd her motion round the Sun. EF, on the other hand, does not afſect the gravitation, but the motion in the curve only. VoL. IIL L This disturbing force ED varies, both in direction and magnitude, by a variution in the Earth's position in relation to the Sun and Jupiter. Thus, in Fig. A, which represents the Earth as almost arrived at the conjunetion vith Jupiter, having Jupiter near his opposition to the Sun, the force EG greatly diminishes the Earth's gravitation to the Sun, and the foree EF accelerates her motion round him in the order of the letters E CP OQ. In Fig. B, the force E G still diminishes the Earth's gravitation o the Sun, but E F retards her motion from O to Q.. In Fig. C, E G increases the Earth's gravitation to the Sun, and E F accelerates her motion round him. It appears very plainly, that the motion round the Sun is accelerated in the quadrants QC and P O, and is retarded in the quadrants CP and O Q- We may also see, that the gravitation to the Sun is increased in the neighbourhood of the points P and Q, but is diminished in the neighbourhood of C and O, and that there is an intermediate poit in ench quadrant where the gravitation suffers no change The greatest diminution of the Earth's gravitation to the Sun must be in C, vhen Jupiter is nearest to the Earth, in the time of his opposition to the Sun. We also see, very plainly, how all these disturbing ſorees may be precisely determined, depending on the proportion of EI to ES and to SI. Nor is the construction restricted to cireular orbitss. Each orbit is to be considered in its true figure, and the parallelogram E G D F is not always a rectangle, but has the side EF lying in the direetion of the tangent. But we believe that the computation is found to be suſficiently exact, without considering the parallelogram E G DF as obliquee. The eccentricity of Jupiters orbit must not be neglected, hecause it amounts to a fourth part of the Earth's distance ſrom the Sun. We have taken the Sun's gravitation to Jupiter as the scale on which the disturbing forces are measured; but this was ſor the greater facility oſ comparing the disturb- ing forces with each other. But they must be compared vwith the Earth's gravitation to the Sun, in order to learn their effect on her motions. It will be exact enough for the present purpose, of merely explaining the method, to suppose Jupiter's mean distance. five times the Earths from the Sun, and that the quantity oſ matter in the Sun is 1000 times that of Jupiter. Therefore the Earths gravitation to the Sun must be 25000 times greater than to Jupiter, when the Earth is about P or Q. When the Earth is at C, her gravitation to Jupiter is mereased in the proportion of 4? to 5, and it is now,355 of her gravitation to the Sun. When the Earth is in O, her gravitation to Jupiter is, 5555 of her gravitation to the Sun. But we are not to imagine, that when the Earth is at C, her motion relative to the Sun is affected in the same manner as if 45]55 of her gravitation were taken away. For we must recollect, that the Sun also gravitates to Jupiter, or is deflected toward him, and therefore toward the Earth at CC. The diminution of the relative gravitation of the Earth is not to be measured by E A, but by EG. All the disturbing forces, EG and EF, corresponding to every position of the Earth and Jupiter, must be considered as fractions of S J, the measure taken for the mean gravitation to Jupiterr. This is,;3;55 of the Earth's gravitation to the Sun. Measuring in this vay, ve shall find, that when the Earth is at P or Q, her gravitation to the Sun is increased by 1355555. For P S or QS ill, in this ease, come in the place of EG in Fig. C, and there will be no such force as EF. AtC, the Earth's gravitation is diminished ſ5375, and at O, ; l⸗⸗ To be able to ascertain the magnitude of the disturbing foree in the different situations of the Earth, is but a very small part oſ the task. It only gives us the momentary impulsion. We must ascertain the accumulated effect of the action during a certain time, or along a certam portion oſ the orbit of the disturbed planet. This is the celebrated problem of three bodies, as it is called, which has employed the utmost eſforts of the great mathematicians ever since the ſime that it first appeared in Newton's lunar theory. It can only be solved by approximation; and even this solution, except in some very particular cases, is of the utmost diſficulty, which shews, by the way, the ſolly of all who pretend to eæplain the motions of the planets by the impulsions of fluids, vhen not three, but millions oſ particles are acting at once. We have to ascertain, in the first place, the accumulated eſfect of the acceleration and retardation of the angular motion of the Earth round the Sun. The general process is one oſ the two ſollowing. lst, Suppose it required to determine how far the attraction oſ Jupiter has made the Earth overpass the quadrantal arch QC oſ her annual orbit. The arch is supposed to be unſolded into a straight line, and divided into minute portions, described in equal times. At each point oſ division is erected a perpendicular ordinate, equal to the accelerating disturbing ſorce EX corresponding to that point. A curve line is drawn through the extremities oſ those ordinatess The unſolded arch being considered as the representation of the time, and the ordinates as the accelerating ſorces, it is plain that the area will represent the acquired velocity. Now, let another figure be constructed having an abscissa to represent the time of the motion. But the ordinates must now be made proportional to the areas of the last ſigure. It is plain, ſrom a former article, that the area of this new figure vill represent, or be proportional to the spaces deseribed, in consequence of the action oſ the disturbing force; and thereſore it will express, nearly, the addition io the space described by the undisturbed planet, or the diminution, iſ the accelerations have been exceeded by the retardations. The other metliod is, to make the unſolded arch the space deseribed, and the ordinates the aceelerations, as beſfore. The area now represents the augmentation oſ the square of the velocit. 'A second figure is now construeted, having the same abscissa now representing the time. The ordinates are made proportional to the square roots of the areas of the first figure, and they vill therefore represent the velocities The areas of this new ſigure will represent the spaces, as in the first process, to be added to the arch deseribed by the undisturbed planet, or subtracted ſrom it. 260. All this being a task of the utmost labour and diſficulty, the ingenuity oſ the mathematicians has heen exereised in facilitating the processs. The penetrating eye of Newton pereeived a path which seemed to lead direetly to the desired point. All the lines which represent the disturbing forces are lines connected vith cireular arches, and thereſore with the circular motion oſ the planet. The main disturbing force ED is a function of the angle oſ commutation CS E, and E F and E G are the sine and cosine of the angle D E G. Newton, in his lunar theory, has given most elegant examples oſ the summation oſ all the suecessive lines EF that are drawn to every point of the arch. Sometimes he finds the sums or accumulated actions of the forces expressed by the sine of an arch; sometimes by the tangent; by a segment oſ the circular area, &e. &c. &e. Euler, D'Alembert, De la Grange, Simpson, and other illustrious cultivators of this philosophy, have immensely improved the methods pointed out and exemplified by Newton, and, by more convenient representations oſ the forces than this elementary view vill admit, have at last made the whole process tolerably easy and plain. But it is still only fit for adepts in the art of symbolical analysiss Their processes are in general so recondite and abstruse, that the analyst loses all eonception, cither of motions or of forces, and his mind ĩs altogether oceupied with the symbols of mathematical reasoning. 261. The second part of the task, the ascertaining the accumulated effect of the force E G, is, in general, much more diſficult. It includes both the changes made on the radius vector S E, and the change made in the curvature of the orbit. The department of mathematical science, immediately subservient to this purpose, is in a more imperfect state than the quadrature of curvess. The process is carried on almost entirely by means of converging seriesess We cannot add any thing here that tends to make it plainer. The lunar theory of Newton, with the commentary of Le Seur and Jacquier, commonly called the desuits Commentary, gives very good examples of the methods which must be followed in this processs. We must refer to the works oſ Euler, Clairaut, Simpson, and De la Place, on the perturbations of Jupiter and Saturn, &e. and content ourselves with merely pointing out some of the more general and obvious consequences of this mutual aetion of the planetss. La Lande has given in his astronomy a very good synopsis of the most approved method. In the Tracts, Physical and Mathematical, by Dr Matthew Stewart, and in his Essay on the Distance of the Sun, are some beautiſful specimens of the geometrical solutions of these problems. 262. When we consider the motion of an inferior planet, disturbed by its gravitation to a superior planet, we see that the inſerior planet is retarded in the quadrants CP and OQ, and accelerated in the quadrants P O and Q C of its synodical period. Its orbit is more incurvated in the vicinity oſ the points P and Q, and its curvature is diminished in the vicinity of the points O and C, and most of all in the vicinity of C in the line oſ conjunction vwith the superior planett. Therefore, if the aphelion and perihelion of the inferior planet should chance to be near the line J CSO oſ the synodical motion, these points vill seem to shiſt forvard. For, the gravitation of the inferior planet to the Sun being diminished, it will not be able so soon to bend its path to a right angle with the radius vector. On the otier hand, should the apsides of the inferior orbit be near the line P SQ, the increase of the inferior planets gravitation to the Sun must sooner produce this effeet, and it will arrive sooner at its aphelion or perihelion, or those points will seem to come westward and to meet it. And thus, in every synodical revolution, the apsides of the inferior planet will twice advance and twice retreat, as iſ the elliptieãl orbit shifted a little to the eastward or vestward. But as the diminution of the nferior planets gravitation to the Sun is much greater when it is n the line CS O than the augmentation of it vhen in the line P SQ, the advances of the apsides, in the course of a synodical period, vill exceed the retreats, and, on the whole, they will advance. All these derangements, or deviations from the simple elliptical motion, are distinetly observed in the heavens; and the calculated effect on each planet corresponds with vhat is observed, vith all the precision that ean be wished for. It is evident that this caleulation must be extremely complicated, and that the eſfeet depends not only on the respective positions, but also on the quantities of matter of the different planetss For these reasons, as Jupiter and Saturn are much larger than any of the other planets, these anomalies are chieſly owing to these to planetss. The apsides of all the planets are observed to advance, except Venus. It might be imagined, that the vast number of comets, which are almost constantly without the orbits of the planets, would cause a general advance oſ all the apsides. But these bodies are so far off, and probably eontain so little matter, that their action is imsensible. 263. The alternate accelerations and retardations of the planets Mercury, Venus, the Earth, and Mars, in consequence of their mutual gravitations, and their gravitations to Jupiter, nearly compensate each other in every revolu. tion; and no effects of them remain aſter a long tract o time, except an advance of their apsides. But there à peculiarities in the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn, vhich , casion very sensible accumulations, and have given cousiderable trouble to the astronomers in discovering their causes. The period of Saturn's revolution round the Sun increases very sensibly, each being about 7 hours longer than the preceding On the contrary, the period of Jupiter is observed to diminish about half as much, that is, about I4 hours in each revolution. This is owing to the particular position of the aphelions of those two planetss Let ABPC (Fig. 28.) be the elliptical orbit of Jupiter, A being the aphelion, and P the perihelion. Suppose the orbit a b  c oſ Saturn to be a circle, having the Sun S in the centre, and let Saturn be supposed to be in a. Then, because Jupiter employs more time (about 140 days) in moving from A to C than in moving from C to P, he must retard the motion of Saturn more than he accelerates him, and Jupiter must be more accelerated by Saturn than he is retarded. The contrary must happen if Saturn be in the opposite part of his orbit. Aſter a tract oſ some revolutions, all must be compensated, because there will be as many oppositions of Saturn to the Sun on one side of the transverse diameter of Jupiters orbit as on the other. But if the orbit oſ Saturn be an ellipse, as in Fig. 28, B, and if the aphelion a be 90 degrees more advanced in the order oſ the signs than the aphelion A of Jupiter, it is plain that there will be more oppositions of Saturn while Jupiter is moving over the semiellipse A CP, than while he moves over the semiellipse P B A, for Saturn is about 400 days longer in the portion b a c of his orbit; and thereſore Saturn will, on the whole, be retarded, and Jupiter accelerated. Nov, it is a fact, that the aphelion oſ Saturn is 70 degrees more advanced on the ecliptic than that oſ Jupiter. Thereſore these changes must happen, and the retardations oſ Saturn must exceed the accelerationss They do 50, nearly in the proportion of 858 to 352. This excess will continue for about 2000 years, when the angle A S) will be 90 degrees complete. It will then begin to decrease, and vill continue decreasing for 16000 years, after which Saturn vill be accelerated, and Jupiter will be retarded. The present retardation of Satum is about , or a days motion, in a century, and the concomitant acceleration of Jupiter is about half as much. (8ee Mem. Acad. Par. 1746.) M. de la Place has happily succeeded in accounting for several irregularities in this gradual change of the mean motions of these two planets, which had considerably perplexed the astronomers in their attempts to ascertain their periods and their maximum by mere observation. These were accompanied by an evident change in the elliptical equations of the orbit, indicating a change of eccentricity. M. de la Place has shewn, that all are precise consequences of universal gravitation, and depend on the near equality of five times the angular motion of Saturn to twice that of J upiter, while the deviation from perfect equality of those two motions introduces a variation in these irregularities, which has a very long period (about 877 years). He has at last given an equation, which expresses the motions with such accuracy, that the calculated place agrees with the modern observations, and with the most ancient, without an error exceeding . (See Mem. Acad. Por. 1785.) 264. In consequence of the mutual gravitation of the planets, the node of the disturbed planet retreats on the orhit of the disturbing planet. Thus, let E K (Fig. 20.) be the plane of the disturbing planets orbit, and let AB be the path oſ the other planet, approaching to the node N. As the disturbing planet is somewhere in the plane EK, its attraction for A tends to make A approach that plane. We may suppose the oblique attraction resolved into two forces, one oſ which is parallel to E K, and the other per. pendicular to it. Let this last be such that, in the time tha the planet A, if not disturbed, would move ſrom A to B the perpendicular force would cause it to deseribe the smail space A C. By the combined action of this force A C with the motion A B, the planet describes the diagonal A D, and croses the plane EX in the point n. Thus the node has shifted from N to n, in a direction contrary to that of the planet's motionn. The planet now proceeds in the line na, getting to the other side of the plane EX. The attraction oſ the disturbing planet now becomes oblique again to the plane, and is partly employed in drawing A (now n a) toward the plane. Let this part of the attraction he again represented by a small space a c. This, compounded vith the progressive motion a b, produces a motion in the diagonal a d, as if the planet had come, not from æ, but from N, a point still more to the westward. The node seems again to have shifted in antecedentiũ signorum And thus it appears that, both in approaching the node, and in quitting the node, the node itself shifts its place, in a direction contrary to that oſ the motion of the disturbed planet. It is farther observable, that the inclination oſ the disturbed orbit increases while the planet approaches the node, and diminishes during the subsequent recess from it. The original inclination A N E becomes A n E, which is greater than ANE. The angle An E or a n K is afterwards changed into a N'K, which is less than a n . In this manner ve perceive that when a planet, having crossed the ecliptie, proceeds on the other side of it, the node recedes, that is, the planet moves as if it had come from a node situated farther west on the ecliptic; and all the vhile, the inclination of the orbit to the ecliptic is diminishingg. When the planet has got 90 eastward from the node vhich it quitted, it is at the greatest distance from the ecliptic, and, in iĩts ſarther progress, it approaches the opposite node. Its path now bends more and more ſoward the ecliptio, and the inelination of its orbit to the ecliptic increnses, and it croses the ecliptic again, in a point con- siderably to the westward of the point where it crossed it beſore. The consequence of this modification of the mutual action of the planets is, that the nodes of all their orbits in the ecliptic recede on the ecliptic, exeept the node of Jupiters orbit J J Fig. 30.), which advances on the ecliptic E K, by retreating on the orbit 8S oſ Saturn, ſrom which Jupiter suſfers the greatest disturbance.* 265. We have hitherto considered the ecliptic as a permanent cirele of the heavens. But it now appears that the Earth must be attracted out of that plane by the other planets. As we refer every phenomenon to the ecliptic by its latitude and longitude in relation to the apparent path of the Sum, it is plain that this deviation oſ the Sun from a fixed plane, must change the latitude of all the stars. The change is s0 very small, however, that it never would have been perceived, had it not heen pointed out to the astronomers by Newton, as necessurily ſollowing from the universal gravitation of matter. The ecliptic (or rather the Sun's path) has a small irregular motion round two points situated about 74 degrees westward from our equinoctial points. 266. The comets appear to be very greatly der in their motions by their gravitation to the planetss The  As this motion of the nodes, and that of the apsides formerly mentioned, hecome sensible by continual accumulation, and as they are equally susceptible of accurate measure and comparison as the greater gravitations which retain the revolving bodies in their orbits, Mr Machin, professor of astronomy at Gresham College, proposed them as the fittest phenomena for informing us of the distance of the Sun. Dr Matthew Stewart made a trial of this method, employing chiefly the motion of the lunar apogee, and has deduced a much greater distance than what can be fairly deduced from the transit of Venus. Notwithstanding some oversights in the summations there given of the disturbing forces, the conclusion seems unexceptionable, and the Sun's distance is, in all probability, not less than II0 or 1l5 nillions of miles. 6 Halleyan comet has been repeatedly so disturbed by passing near to Jupiter, that its periods were very eonsiderably altered by this action. A comet, observed in 1770 by Lexel, Prosperin, and other accurate astronomers, has been s0 much deranged in its motions, that its orbit has been totally changed. Its mean distance, period, and perihelion distance, calculated from good observations, which had been continued during three months, agreed with all the observations within I of a degreee In its aphelion, it is a small matter more remote than Jupiter, and must have been so near him in 1767 (about ꝗ; oſ its distance from the Sun) that its gravitation to Jupiter must have heen thrice as great as that to the Sun. Moreover, in its revolution following this appearance in 1770, namely, on the 28d oſ August 1777, it must have come vastly nearer to Jupiter, and its gravitation to Jupiter must have exceeded ĩts gravitation to the Sun more than 200 times. No wonder then that it has been diverted into quite a diſferent path, and that astronomers cannot tell what is become oſ it. And this, by the vay, suggests some singular and momentous refleetions. The number of the comets is certainly great, and their courses are unknown. They may frequently come near the planetss. The comet of I764 has one oſ its nodes very close to the Earth's orbit, and it is very possible that the Earth and it may chance to be in that part of their respeetive orbits at the same time. The efſcet of such vieinity must be very remarkable, probably producing such tides as would destroy most of the habitable surfacee But, as its continuance in that great proximity must be very momentary, by reason of its great velocity, the effect may not he so great. When the comet oſ I770 was so near to Jupiter, it was in aphelio, moving slowly, and therefore may have continued some considerable time theree Yet it does not appear that it produced any derangement in the motion of his satellites. We must therefore conclude, that either the comet did not continue in the path that was supposed, or that it contained only a very small quantity of matter, being perhaps little more than a dense vapour. Many circumstances in the appearance oſ comets countenance this opinion of their naturee As they retire to very great distnces from the Sun, and in that remote situation move very slowly, they may greatly disturb each others motion. It is therefore a reasonable conjecture oſ Sir Isaac Newton, that the comet of 1680, at its next approach to the Sun, may really ſall into him altogether. Ofr the Lunar Inequalities. 267. Of all the heavenly bodies, the Moon has attracted the greatest notice, and her motions have heen the most scrupulously examined: and it may be added, that oſ them all she has been the most reſractory. It is but within these few years past that we have been able to ascertain her motions with the precision attained in the cases of the other planets. Not that her apparent path is contorted, like those of Mercury and Venus, running into loops and knots, but hecause the orbit is continually shifting its place and changing its ſorm; and her real motions in it are accelerated, retarded, and deflected, in a great variety of vays While the ascertaining the place of Jupiter or Saturn requires the employment of five or six equations, the Moon requires at least forty to attain the same exactness The correetions introduced by those equations are so various, both in their magnitude and in their periods, and have, of consequence, been s0 blended and complicated together, that it surpassed the power of ohservation to discover the greatest part of them, because ve did not know the occasions which made them necessary, or the physical connexion which they had vith the aspects of the other bodies of the solar system. Only such as arose to a conspicuous magnitude, and had an evident relation to the situation of the Sun, vere ſished out from among the rest. 268. From all this complication and embarrassment the discovery of universal gravitation has freed us. We have only to follow this into its consequences, as modified by the particular situation of the Moon, and we get an equation, which must be made, in order to determine a deviation from simple elliptical motion that must result from the action of the Sun. This alone, followed regularly into all ĩts consequences, gives all the great equations which the sagacity of observers had discovered, and a multitude of other corrections, vhich no sagacity could ever have detected. Discimus hinc tandem quã causã argentea Phœbe Passibus haud æquis eat, cur subdita nulli Hactenus astronomo, numerorum fræna recusat Obvia conspicimus, nubem pollente mathesi. We have seen that since the Moon aceompanies the Earth in its revolution round the Sun, we must conelude that she is under the influence of that force which defleets the Earth into that revolution. If, in every instamt, the Moon vere impelled by precisely the same foree which then impels the Earth, and if this force were also in the same direction, the Moon's motion relative to the Earth would not sustain any change. She would describe an accurate ellipse having the Earth in the focus, and would deseribe areas proportional to the timess. But neither oſ these conditions are agreeable to the real state of things. The Moon is sometimes nearer to the Sun, and sometimes more remote from him than the Earth is, and is therefore more or less attracted by him; and though the distances oſ both from the Sun are sometimes equal (as vhen the Moon is in quadrature) the direction of her gravitation to the Sun is then considerably different from that of the Earth's gravitation to him. These cireumstances change considerably all her motions relative to the Earth. But, since the planetary force follows the precise inverse duplicate ratio of the distances, we man tell what its intensity is in every position of the Moon, in what direction it acts, and what deviation it will produee during any interval of time We may proceed in the following manner. 269. Let S (Fig- 8l.) represent the Sun, E the Earth, moving in the arch A E B. Let the Moon be su to describe round the Earth the circle C B O A. Join E S and M S, and let S M cut the Earth's orbit in N. Lastly, Let E S be taken as the measure of the Earti's gravitation to the Sun, and as the seale on vhich we estimate the disturbing forces. To learn the magnitude and direction of the ſorce whieh disturbs the Moon's motion when she is in any point M of her orbit, gravitating to the Sun in the direction M S, we must institute the following analogy MS': ES  ES: MG. Then it is evident that if the Moon's gravitation to the Sun be represented by ES when she is in the points A or B, equally distant vith the Earth, M G vill represent her gravitation to the Sun when she is in M; for it is to ES in the inverse duplicate ratio of the distances from him. Now this foree M G, being neither equal  E S, nor in the same direction, must change or disturb the Moon's molion relative to the Earth. We may suppose M G to result from the comhined action of two ſorces M F and M H (hat is, M G may be the diagonal of a parallelogram MPF G H), of which one, M F, is parallel and equal to ES. Were the Earth and Moon urged by the ſorces ES and MF only, their relative motions would not be affected. Therefore M H alone disturbs this relative motion, and may be taken for its indieation and measure. The disurbing force may. be otherwise represented by varying the conditions on which the parallelogram M F GH is formed. It may be formed on the supposition that one side of the parallelogram shall have the direction M E. And this is perhaps the best way of resoling M G for the purposes oſ calculation, and aecordingly has been mos generally employed by the great geometers ho have cul tivated this theory But the method followed in this outline was thought more elementary and most illustrative of the effects. The magnitude and direction oſ this disturbing force depends on the form of the parallelogram MFGH and consequently on the proportion of M F and MG, and on their relative positionss We may obtain an easy expression of the force M H by the consideration that the rate oſ inerease of M S is double of the rate of increase of M S. When a line increases by a very small addition, the ratio of the increment of the line to the line is but the half of that of the square to the squaree Thus, let the line M S be supposed 100, and E S 101, differing by one part in a hundred. We have M S' æ 10000, and E S' æ 10201, differing by very nearly two parts in a hundred; the error of this supposition being only one part in ten thousand. Suppose M S = 1000, and ES  1001, differing by one part in a thousand. Then M S æ 1000000, and E S 1002001, differing from M S by two parts in a thousand very nearly, the error of the supposition being only one part in a million, &e. &e. Now the greatest difference that can occur hetween E S and M S is at new and full Moon, vhen the Moon is in C or O. In this case E C is nearly the 890th part of ES, and ve have ES': O8  890: 391, or  390: 399,0206; and therefore, in supposing E S to OS* as 890 to 399, we commit an error of no more than 4 of ;3,, that is y⸗æ5 viz. less than one part in fifteen thousand, in the most unfavourable circumstances. Thereſore the difſerence between NS (or E S) and M G may he supposed equal to M D, vithout any sensible error, that is, to the double of N M, the difference of NS and M S. Thereſore M G—NS  2 M N very nearly, and M G—M S, that is, S G 3 M N very nearly We may also take MI for M H vithout any sensible error, and may suppose E I S MN. For the lines M F, IP, H G, being equal and parallel, and ſi S P nearly coinciding with S , from which it never deviates more than &, E I uill nearly coincide with E H, 270. These considerations ill give us a very simple manner of representing and measuring the disturbing ſorce in every position of the Moon, which will have no error that ean be of any signiſicancee Moreover, any error that inheres in it, is completely compensated by an equal error, of an opposite kind, in another point oſ the orbit. Therefore, Let us suppose that the portion oſ the Earth's path round the Sun sensibly coincides with the straight line AB Fig. 32.) perpendicular to the line OC S, passing through the Sun, and called the line oſ the sYZicrEs, as A B is called the line of the ovADEATURES. Let M D cross AB at right angles, and produce it to R, so that M P  8 MN. doin RE, and drav MI parallel to itt. MI vill, in all cases, have the position and magnitude corresponding to the disturbing force. DOr, more simply, make EI3M N, taking the point I on the same side of A B with M, and drav M I. MI is the disturbing force. 2l. This force M I may be resolved into two, viz. ML, having the direction of the Moons motion, and M K perpendicular to her motion, that is, M K lying in the direction of the radius vector M E, and M L having the direetion of the tangent. The force M L affects the Moon's angular motion round the Earth, either accelerating or retarding it, vhile the force M X either augments or diminishes her gravitation to the Earth. The disturbing fore M I may also be resolved into ME3SMN, and RI, oo M E; that is, into a foræ always proportional to MN, and in that direction, and ano. ther force in the direction of the Moows gravitation to the Earth. This is useſul on another occasion. 278. When the Moon is in quadrature, the point I eoꝶ Vou. IIIL M cides with E, because there is no M N. In this case, thereſore, the force M L does not exist, and M K coincides with M E. The disturbing force M I is now wholly employed in augmenting the Moon's gravitation to the Earth. The gravitations of the Earth and Moon to the Sun are equal, but not paralle. If ES expresses the magnitude of the Moons gravitation to the Sun, then M E vill express (on the same scale) the augmentation in quadratures of the Moon's gravitation to the Earth, occasioned by the obliquity of the Suns action. It is convenient to take this quadrature augment of the Moon's gravitation to the Earth as the unit of the scale on which all the disturbing forces are measured, and to calculate what fraction of her whole gravitation it amounts to. 278. Let G express the Moons gravitation to the Sun, g her gravitation to the Earth, and  the increase of this gravitation. Also let 5 and m be the length of a sydereal year and of a sydereal month. In order to learn in what proportion the Moon's gravitation to the Earth is affected by the disturbing force, it will be convenient to know what proportion its increment in quadrature has to the whole gravitationn. We may thereſore institute the following proportions. D àa ES EB G p /7: ii P7 yvm gd G/ EB: ES. Therefore ESXEB EBXES ] g : 8 V mnm:y.  ES EB3050 ll 7 m 30535081::  Jrã| =918s: 1 very nearly. Thus we see that the Moons gravitation to the Sun is more than twice her gravitation to the Earth. The consequence of this is, that even when the Moon is in conjunction, at nev Moon, between the Earth and the Sun, her path in absolute space is concave toward the Sun, und convex towarũ the Earth. Even there she is deſlected, not The Moons mean gravitation to the Earth is therefore to its increment in the quadratures by the action of the Sun, in the duplicate ratio of the Earth's period round the Sun to the lunar period round the Earth. This is very nearly in the proportion of I79 to . Her gravitation is increased, when in quadrature, about ;3;7. This will diminish the chord of curvature and increase the curvature in the same proportion. 274. In order to see what change it sustains in any other position of the Moon, such as M, join E D, and drav D Q perpendicular to EM. It is plain that DQ is the sine of the angle D E Q, which is twice the angle OE Q or CEM, that is, twice the Moons distance ſrom the nearest syzigy. QE is the cosine of the same angle The triangles MDQ and E IK are similar. EI is equal to I3M D. Therefore EX I3 M Q,  I ME + 13 E Q, using the sign + when D E m is less than90°, or CEM is less than 459, and the sign  when CE M is greater than 45. Thereſorr M xæ2M E + Ià EQ. Thereſore, if M E be equal to Ià E Q, that is, i M E be =S E Q. M Xis retoward the Earth, but toward the Sun. This is a very curious, and seemingly paradoxical assertion. But nothing is better established. The tracing the Moons motion in absolute space is the completest demonstration of it. It is not a looped curve, as one, at first thinking, would imagine, but a line always concave toward the Sun. Indeed areely any things can be more unlike than the real motions of the Moon are to what we first imagine them to be. At new Moon, she appears to be moving to the left, and we see her gradually pussing the stars, leaving them to the right; and caleulating from the distance 230000 miles, and the angular motion, about half a degree in an hour, we should say that she is moving to the leſt at the rate of 38 miles in a minute. But the fact is, that she is then moving to the right at the rate of 1100 miles in a minute. But as the Earth, from whence we view her, is moving at the rate of 1140 miles in a minute, the Moon is leſt behind. duced o nothing, or the ſorce M I is then perpendicular to the radius vector, or is a tangent to the circle The angle CE M, or the arch CM, has then its secant E I equal io thrice its cosine M N. This arch is 54 44. There are thereſore four points in the circular orbit distant 54 4 ſrom the line of the syzigies, where the Moon's gravitation to the Earth is not aſſected by the action of the Sun. If the arch CM exceed this, the point  will lie within the orbit, as in Fig. 33. indicating an augmentation of the Moon's gravitation to the Earth. AtB, IIEQ=IEM, and thereſore 1 E QIEM E M, as before. 215. At Oand atC, IIEQ 4+EM 2EM. Thereſore, in the syzigies, the diminution oſ the Moon's gravitation to the Earth is double oſ the augmentation oſ it in quadratures, or it is of her gravitation to the Earth. ĩ 276. With respect to the forcee M L, it is evidently 2 13 D Q or 13 oſ the sine of twice the Moon's distance from opposition or conjunction. It augments from the syzigy to the octant, where it is a maximum, and from thence it diminishes to nothing in the quadrature. In its maximum slate, it is about], oſ the Moon's gravitation to the Earth. 2V. It appears, by constructing the figure ſor the different positions oſ the Moon in the course of a lunation, that this ſorce M L retards the Moon's motion round the Earth in the first and third quarters CA and O B, but accelerates her motion in the second and last quarters A O and B C. Thus, in Fig. 32, M L leads from M in a direction opposite to that oſ the Moon's motion eastward from her conjunction at C to her first quadrature in A In Fig. 8. M L lies in the direction of her motion; and it is plain that M L will be similarly situated in the quadrants CA and O B, as also in the quadrants A O and BC. All these disturbing ſorces depend on the proportion of E B o ES. Thereſore, while ES remains the same, the disturhing forces will change in the same proporton - vith the Moon's distance from the Earth. 278. But let us suppose that ES changes in the course of the Earth's motion in her elliptical orbit. Then, did the Sun continue to act with the same force as before, still the disturbing foree would change in the proportion of E S, becoming smaller as ES becomes greater, because the proportion of E B to E S becomes smaller. But, when E S increases, the gravilation to the Sun diminishes in the duplicate ratio of ES. Thereſore the disturbing force varies in the inverse proportion of ES', and, in general, is EB ES 5 in January than in July, it ſollows that in January all the disturbing forces will be nearly ,); greater than in July. What has now been said must suſfice for an account of the forces which disturb the Moons motion in the different parts of a circular orbit round the Earth. The same ſorces operate on the Moon revolving in her true elliptical orbit, but varying with the Moons distance from the Earth. They operate in the same manner, producing, not the same motions, but the same changes of motion. 279. It would seem now that it is not a very diſficult matter to compute the motion and the place of the Moon for any particular moment. But it is one of the most diſficult problems that have employed the talents oſ the first mathematicians of Europe. Sir Isaac Newton has treated this subject with his usual superiority, in his Principles oſ Natural Philosophy, and in the separate Essay on the Lunar Theory. But he only began the subject, and contented himself with marking the principal topics oſ investigation, pointing out the roads that were to be held in each, and furnishing us with the mathematies and the methods vhich were to be ſolloed. In all these particulars, great improvements have been made by Euler, D'Alembert, Therefore, as the Earth is nearer to the Sun about Clairaut, and Mayer of Gottingen. This last gentleman, by a most sagacious examination and comparison of the data furnished by observation, and a judicious employment of the physical principles of Sir Isaac Newton, has constructed equations so exactly fitted to the various circumstances of the case, that he has made his lunar tables correspond with observation, both the most ancient and the most recent, to a degree of exactness that is not exceeded in any tables of the primury planets, and far surpassing any other tables of the lunar motions. We can, vith propriety, only make some very general observations on the effects of the continued action oſ the disturbing forces. 250. In the syigies and quadrature, the combined force, arising from the Moons natural gravitation to the Earth and the Sun's disturbing force, is directed to the Earth. Therefore the Moon vill, notwithstanding the disturbing force, continuè to describe areas proportional to the times. But as soon as the Moon quits those stations, the tangential force M L begins to operate, and the combined force is no longer directed precisely to the Earth. In the octauts, vhere the tangential force is at its maximum, it causes the combined force to deviate about half a degree from the radius vector, and therefore considerably aſfects the angular motion. Let the Moon set out from the second or fourth octant, vith her mean angular velocity. Therefore M L, then at its maximum, increases continually this velocity, which augments, till the Moon comes to a syzigy. Here the accelerating force ends, and a retarding force begins to aet, and the motion is now retarded by the same degrees by vhich it was accelerated just beforee At the next octant, the sum of the retardations from the syzigy is just equal to the sum oſ the accelerations from the preceding octant. The velocity of the Moon is now reduced to its mean state. But her place is more advanced by 37 than it would have been, had the Moon not been aſfected by the Sun, but had moved from the syzigy with her mean velocity. Proceeding in her course from this octant, the retardation continues, and in the quadrature the velocity is reduced to its lowest state; but here the accelerating force begins again, and restores the velocity to its mean state in the next octant. Thus it appears, that in the octants the velocity is always in its medium state, attains a maximum in passing through a syzigy, and is the least possible in quadrature. In the first and third octant, the Moon is 37 east, or a-head of her mean place; and in the second and fourth, is as much to the westward of it; and in the syzigies and quadratures her mean and true places are the same. Thus, hen her velocity differs most from its medium state, her calculated and observed places are the same, and where her velocity has attained its mean state, her calculated and observed places diſſer most widely. This is the case with all astronomieal equations. The motions are computed first in their mean state; and vhen the changing causes increase to a maximum, and then diminish to nothing, the effect, which is a change oſ place, has attained its maximum by continual addition or deduetion. 281. This alternate inerease and diminution oſ the Moons angular motion in the course of a lunation was first discovered, or at least distinguished from the other irregularities of her motion, by Tycho Brahè, and by him called the Equation of vaRIATION. The deduetion of it from the principle of universal gravitation by Sir Isaac Newton is the most elegant and perspicuous specimen of mechanical investigation that is to be seenn. The address which he has shewn in giving sensible representations and measures of the momentary actions, and of their accumulated results, in all parts of the orbit, are peculiarly pleasing to all persons of a mathematical taste, and are so apposite and plain, that the investigation becomes highly instruetive o a beginner in this part oſ the higher mathematiess. The late Dr Matthe Stewart, in his Tracts Physical and Mathematical, following Newton's example, has given some very beautiful examples oſ the same method. 282. We have hitherto considered the Moon's orbit as circular, and must now inquire whether its form will suſfer any change. We may expeet that it will, since we see a very great disturbing force diminishing its terrestrial gravity in the syzigies, and increasing it in the quadratures. Let us suppose the Moon to set out from a point 850 I6short of a quadraturee The force M X, which we may call a centripetal force, hegins to act, increasing the deflecting ſorce. This must render the orbit more incurvated in that purt, and this change will be continued through the whole oſ the arch, extending 859 16' on each side oſ the quadrature. At 85° I6 east oſ a quadrature, the gravity recovers its mean state; but the path at this point now makes an acute angle with the radius vector, which brings the Moon nearer to the Earth in passing through the point of conjunetion or oppositionn. Through the whole of the arch Vu5, extending 54 49 on each side of the syzigies, the Moon's gravitation is greatly diminished; and thereſore her orbit in this place is flattened, or made less curve than the cirele, till at v, 560 44' east of the syzigy, the Moons gravity recovers its mean state, and the orbit its mean curvature. 2883. In this manner, the orbit, ſfrom being circular, hecomes of an oval form, most incurvated at A and B, and least s0 at O and C, and having its longest diameter lying in the quadratures; not exactly however in those points, on account of the variation of velocity which we have shewn to be greatest in the second and fourth quadrants. The longest diameter lies a small matter short of the points A and B, that is, to the westward of them. Sir Isaac Newton has determined the proportion of the two diameters oſ this oval, viz. A B=æT0 and O C æ 69. It may seem strange that the Moon comes nearest to the Earth when her gravity is most diminished; but this is owing to the incurvation of the orbit in the neighbourhood of the quadratures. 284. The Moons orbit is not a circle, but an ellipsis, having the Earth in one of the foci. Still, however, the above assertions vill apply, by always conceiving a circle desceribed through the Moon's place in the real orbit. But we must now inquire whether this orbit also suffers any change of form by the action of the Sun. Let us suppose that the line of the apsides coincides with the line of syZigies, and that the Moon is in apogee. Her gravitation to the Earth is diminished in conjunction and opposition, s0 that, when her gravitation in perigee is compared with her gravitation in apogee, the gravitations diſfer more than in the inverse duplicate ratio of the distance. The natural forces in perigee and apogee are inversely as the squares of the distance. If the diminutions by the Suns action were also inversely as the square of the distance, the remaining gravitations would be in the same proportion stil. But this is far from being the case here; ſor the diminutions are directly as the distance, and the greatest quantity is taken from the smallest force. Therefore the forces thus diminished must differ in a greater proportion than before, that is, in a greater ratio than the inverse oſ the square of the distances.* l * Thus, let the following perigee and apogee distances be compared, and the corresponding gravitations with their diminutions and remainders. Perigee. Mean. Apoge. Distances - - - 8 10 12 Gravitations - - - 144 100 64 Diminutions - - - 2 24 3 Remaining gravities - 142 97h 61 Now 12:: 8 =142: 63,11. Thereſore 142 is to 6l in a much greater ratio ſhan the inverse of ſthe square oſ the distance. Let the Moon come from the apogee of this disturbed orbit. Did her gravity inerease in the due proportion, she would come to the proper perigee. But it inereases in a greater proportion, and vill bring the Moon nearer to the focus; that is, the orbit will become more eccentric, and its elliptieal equation vill increase along with the eccentricity. Similar effects ill result in the Moon's motion from perigee to apogee. Her apogean gravity being too much diminished, she vill go farther off, and thus the eccentricity and the equation of the orbit will be increased. Suppose the Moon to change when in apogee, and that we caleulate her place seven days after, vhen she should he in the vicinity of the quadraturee We apply her elliptical equation (about 6 20) to her mean motion. If we compare this caleulation with her real place, ve shall find the true place almost 20 behind the calculationn. We should find, in like mammer, that in the last quadrature, her calculated place, by means of the ordinary equation of the orbit, is more than 2 behinud the true or observed place. The orbit has become more eccentrie, and the motion in it more unequable, and acquires a greater equation. This may rise to 70 40, instead of 60 20, which corresponds to the mean form of the orbit. But let us next suppose, that the apsides of the orbit lie in the quadratures, vhere the Moons gravitation to the Earth is increased by the action of the Sun. Were it increased in the inverse duplicate ratio of the distances, the new gravities would still be in this duplieate proportion. But, in the present case, the greatest addition will be made to the smallest forc. The apogee and perigee gravities, therefore, will not differ sufficiently; and the Moon, setting out from the apogee in one quadrature, will not, on her arrival at the opposite quadrature, come so near the Earth as she otherwise would have done. Or, should she set out from her perigee in one quadrature, she will not go ſar enough from the Earth in the opposite quadrature; that is, the eccentricity of the orbit will, in both cases, be diminished, and, along vith it, the equation corresponding. Our calculations for her place in the adjacent opposition or conjunetion, made with the ordinary orbital equation, vill be faulty, and the errors vill be of the opposite kind to the former. The equation necessary in the present case vill not exceed 5 5. In all intermediate positions of the apsides, similar anomalies will be observed, verging to the one or the other extreme, according to the position of the line oſ the apsides. The equation pro eæpediendo calculo, by Dr Halley, contains the corrections which must be made on the equation of the orbit, in order to bring it into the state which corresponds with the present eccentricity oſ the orbit, depending on the Sun's position in relation to its transverse axis. 285. All these anomalies are distinctly observed, agreeing with the deductions from the effects of universal gravitation with the utmost precision. The anomaly itselſ was discovered by Ptolemy, and the discovery is the greatest mark of his penetration and sagacity, because it is extremely difficult to find the periods and the changes of this correetion, and it had escaped the observation of Hipparchus, and the other eminent astronomers at Alexandria, during three hundred years of continued observationn Ptolemy called it the Equation of ævECTION, because he explained it by a certain shifting of the orbitt. His explanation, or rather his hypothesis for directing his caleulation, is most ingenious and reſined, but is the least compatible with other phenomena of any of Ptolemys contrivances. 286. The deduetion of this anomaly from its physical principles was a far more intricate and diſficult task than the variation which equation had furnished. It is, however, accomplished by Newton in the completest manner. It is an interesting case oſ the great problem of three bodies, which has employed, and continues to employ, the 5 talents and best efforts of the great mathematicians Mr Machin gave a pretty theorem, which seemed to promise great assistance in the solution oſ this problem. Newton had demonstrated, that a body, deflected by a centripetal force directed to a fixed point, moved so0, that the radius vector described areas proportional to the times. Mr Machin demonstrated, that if deflected by forces directed to two ſixed points, the triangle connecting it with them (which may be called the plana vectriæ) also described slids proportional to the times. Little help has been gotten from itt. The equations founded on it, or to which ĩt leads, are oſ inextrieable complexity. 287. Not only the form, but also the position of the lunar orbit, must suffer a change by the action of the Sun. It has already been demonstrated, that if gravity decreased ſaster than in the proportion oſ æ the apsides oſ an orbit will advance, but will retreat, if the gravitation decrease at a slower rate. Now, ve have seen, that while the Moon is vithin 540 44' of the syZigies, the gravity is dimnished in a greater proportion than that of Therefore the apsides which lie in this part oſ the synodical revolution must advancee. For the opposite reasons, while they lie within 350 I6' of the quadratures, they must recedee But sinc the diminution in syzigy is double oſ the augmentation in quadrature, and is continued through a much greater portion oſ the orbit, the apsides must, in the course of a complete lunation, advance more than they recede, or, on the vhole, they must advancee. They must advance most, and recede least, vhen near the syzigies; because at this time the diminution of gravity by the disturbing foree bears the greatest proportion to the natural diminution of gravity corresponding to the elliptical motion, and because the augmentation in quadrature vill then bear the smallest proportion to it, because the conjugate axis of the ellips is in the line of quadrature. The contrary must happen when the apsides are near the quadratures, and it will be found that, in this case, the recess will exceed the progress. In the octants, the motion of the apsides in consequentia is equal to their mean motion; but their place is most distant from their true place, the difference being the accumulated sum oſ the variations. But since, in the course oſ a complete revolution of the Earth and Moon round the Sun, the apsides take every position with respect to the line of the syzigies, they will, on the whole, advancee Their mean progress is about three degrees in each revolution. 268. It has been observed already, that the investigation of the effects of the foree M X is mueh more diſſieult than that of the effects oſ the foree M L. This last, only treating oſ acceleration and retardation, rarely employs more than the direct method of ſluxions, and the ſinding of the simpler fluents, which are expressed by circular arches and their concomitant lines. But the very elementary part of this second investigation engages us at once in the study of curvature and the variation of curvature; and its simplest process requires infinite serieses, and the higher orders of fluxions. Sir Isaac Newton has not considered this quesſion in the same systematic manner that he has treated the other, but has generally arrived at his conclusions by more cireuitous helps, suggested by circumstances peculiar to the case, and not so capable oſ a general application. He has not even given us the steps by which he arrived at some of his conclusions His excellent commentators, Le Seur and Jaquier, have, with much address, supplied us vith this information. But all that they have done has been very particular and limited. The determination of the motion of the lunar apogee by the theory of gravity is found to be only one- halt of what is really observedl. This was very soon remarked by Mr Machin, but without being able to amend it; and it remained, for many years, a sort of blot on the doctrine of universal gravitation. 289. As the Newtonian mathematics continued to improve by the united labours of the first geniuses of Europe, this investigation received successive improvements also. At last, M. Clairaut, about the year 1748, considered the problem of these bodies, mutually gravitating, in general terms. But finding it beyond the reach of our attainments in geometry, unless considerably limited, he confined his attention to a case which suited the interesting case of the lunar motionss. He supposed one of the thre: bodies immensely larger than the other two, and at a very great distance from them; and the smallest of the others revolving round the third in an ellipse little different from a cirele; and limited his attention to the disturbances only of this motionWith this limitation he solved the problem of the lunar theory, and constructed tables of the Moons motion. But he too found the motion of the apogee only one-half of what is observed.Euler, and D'Alembert, and Simpson, had the same result; and mathematicians began to suspect that some other force, besides that of a gravitation inversely as the square of the distance, had some share in these motions. At last, MClairaut discovered the source oſ all their mistakes and their troublee A term had been omitted, vhich had a great influence in this particular circumstance, but depended on some of the other anomalies of the Moon, with which he had not suspeeted any connexion. He found, that the disturbances, which he was considering as relating to the Moons motion in the simple ellipse, should have been considered as relating to the orbit already aſſected by the other inequalities. When this was done, he found that the motion of the apogee, deduced from the action of the Sun, was precisely what is observed to obtain. Euler and DAlembert, vho were employed in the same investigation, acceded without scruple to M. Clairauts improvement of his analysis; and all are now satisſied with respect to the competency of the principle of universal gravitation to the explanation of all these phenomena of the lunar motions. 290. In the whole of the preceding investigation, ve have considered the disturbing force of the Sun as acting in the plane of the Moon's orbit, or ve have considered that orbit as coinciding with the plane of the eclipticc. But the Moon's orbit is inelined 1o the plane of the ecliptic nearly 5, and therefore the Sun is seldom in its plane. Hiĩs action must generally have a tendency to draw the Moon out of the plane in which she is then moving, and thus to change the inclination of the Moons orbit to the ecliptic. But this oblique force may always be resolved into two others, one of which shall be in the plane of the orbit, and the other perpendicular to it. The first will be the disturbing ſorce already considered in all its modifications. We must now consider the effect of the other.* 201. Let ACBO (Fig. 85.) be the Moon's orbit cutting the ecliptic in the line N N' of the nodes, the half NM AN hbheing raised above the ecliptie, and the other hal? NB ON being below it. The clotted circle is the orbit, turmed on the line NN till it coincide with the plane oſ the ecliptic. C, O, A, and B, are, as formerly, the points of syzigy and quadraturee Let the Moon be in M. Let AE B be the intersection oſ a plane perpendicular to * It is very diſficult to give such a representation of the lunar orhit, inclined to the plane of the ecliptic, that the lines which repreænt the different affections of the disturbing force may appear detached from the planes of the orbit and ecliptic, and thus enable us to perceive the efficiency of them, and the nature of the effect produced. The most attentive consideration by the reader is necessary ſor giving him a distinct notion of these circumstances. the ecliptic. Drav M n perpendicular to the plane AEB, and thereſore parallel to the ecliptic, and to O C. Take EI equal to 3 M n, and join M I. MI is the Suns disturbing force, (7.) and EM measures the augmentation of the Moons gravitation when in quadrature. It is plain, that M I ĩs in a plane passing through E S, and intersecting the lunar orbit in the line M E, and the ecliptic in the line EI. MI, thereſore, does not lie in the plane of the lunar orbit, nor in that of the ecliptic, but is between them both. The force M I may therefore be conceived as resolvable into two forces, one of which lies in the Moons orbit, and the other is perpendicular to it. This resolution vill be effected, if we drav Iĩi upward from the ecliptie, till it meet the plane of the lunar orbit perpendicularly in i. Nov join M i, and complete the parallelogram MiIm, having MI for its diagona. The force M I is equivalent to Mi lying in the plane of the Moon's orbit, and M m perpendicular to it. By the foree M i the Moon is accelerated or retarded, and has her gravitation to the Earth augmented or diminished, while the foree M m draws the Moon out of the plane NCM; or that plane is made to shiſt its position, so that its intersection NN' shiſts its place a little. The inclination of the orbit to the ecliptic also is affectedl. Let a plane Iiĩ G be drawn through Iĩ perpendicular to the line NN of the nodes. The line E G is perpendicular to this plane, and therefore to the lines G I and Gi. Also, Ii G is a right angle, because Ii was drawn perpendicular to the plane Mi G E. Now, if EM be considered as the radius oſ the tables, Mn is the sine of the Moons distance from quadrature. Call this. Then E I=/2 . Also, making E I radius, IG is the sine of the node's distance ſrom the line of syzigy- Call this s. Also, IG being made radius, Ii oo M m is the sine of the inclination of the orbit to the ecliptic. Call this ĩ. 6 Therefore ve have EM: E IæDB: à9 EI:: IGBR: IG: Mm æR: i Thereſore EM: Mm æ/D R: S8q5i and Mn3EMX &&Thus ve have obtained an expression of the ſorce M m, which tends to change the position and inclination of the orhit. Prom this expression ve may draw several conelusions which indieate its diſferent effects. Cor. l. This force vanishes, that is, there is no such force vhen the Moon is in quadrature For then q, or the line M n, is nothing. Now ꝗ heing one of the numerical factors oſ the numerator oſ the fraction the fraction itself has no value We easily perceive the physical cause oſ the evanescence of the foree M m when M comes into the line of quadrature When this happens, the vhole disturbing force has the direction A E, the then radius veetor, and is in the plane of the orbit. There is no such force as M m in this situation of things, the disturbing force being wholly employed in augmenting the Moons gravitation to the Earth. 2. The foree M m vanishes also when the nodes are in the syzigy For there the ſactor s in the numerator vanishes. We pereeive the physical reason of this also. For vhen the nodes are in the syigies, the Sun is in the plane of the orbit; or this plane, if produced, passes through the Sun. In such case, the disturbing force is in the plane of the orbit, and ean have no part, M m acting out of that 3. The chieſ varieties of the foree M m depend, however, on 3, the sine oſ the node's distance from syzigy. For in every revolution, ꝗ goes through the same series of successive values, and i remains nearly the same in all revolutionss. Thereſore, the circumstance vhich ill most Vou. III. N distinguish the different lunations is the situation oſ the node. 202. This force bends the Moons path ſowarũd the ecliptie, when the points M and I are on the same side oſ the line of the nodes, but bends it away ſrom the ecliptic vhen N lies between I and M. This circumstance, kept firmly in mind, and considered with eare, will explain all the deviations occasioned by the foree M m. Thus, in the situation of the nodes represented in the figure, let the Moon set out ſrom conjunction in C, moving in the arch CMAO. All the way from C to A, the disturbing foree MI is below the elevated hall NM N oſ the Moon's orbit between it and the ecliptic, and therefore the force M m pulls the Moon out of the plane oſf her orbit toward the ecliptic. The same thing happens during the Moons motion from N to C. This vill appear by constructing the same kind of parallelogram on the diagonal M I drawn from any point between N and C. When the Moon has passed the quadrature A, and is in M, the foree M'I is both above the ecliptic, and above the elevated half of the Moons orbit. This will appear by draving M' perpendicular to EN, and joining gT. The line M' g is in the orbit, and T is in the ecliptic, and the triangle M gI' stands elevated, and nearly perpendicular on both planes, so that M'I is above them both. In this case, the foree M' m', in pulling the Moon out of the plane of her orbit, separates her from it on that side which is most remote from the ecliptic; that is, causes the path to approach more obliquely to the ecliptic. The figure 36. will illustrate this NT is the ecliptic, and M N is the orbit, both seen edgeways, as they would appear to an eye placed in , (85.) in the line NN produced beyond the orbit The disturbing force, acting in the direction MI, may be resolved into M' ꝓ in the direetion of the orbit plane, and M m perpendicular to it. The part M'm', being compounded vith the simultaneous motion M 5, composes a motion M'r, which intersects the ecliptic in n. When M, in Fig. 35, gets to M', the path is again bent toward the ecliptic, and continues so all the way from N' to B, where it begins to act in the same manner as in M' between A and N-. 2038. By the action of this lateral force, the orbit must be continually shifting its position, and its interseetion with the ecliptic; or, to speak more accurately, the Moon is made to move in a line which does not lie all in one plane. In imagination, ve conceive an orbital material line, somewhat like a hoop, of an elliptical shape, all in one plane, passing through the Earth, and, instead of conceiving the Moon to quit this hoop, we suppose the hoop itself to shiſt its position, so that the arch in which the Moon is, in any moment, takes the direction oſf the Moons motion in that moment. Its intersection with the ecliptic (perhaps at a considerable distance from the point occupied by the Moon) shifts accordingly. This hoop may be conceived as having an axis, perpendicular to its plane, passing through the Earth. This axis will incline to one side from the pole of the ecliptic about five degrees, and, as the line NN oſ the nodes shifts round the ecliptie, the extremity of this axis will describe a cirele round the pole of the ecliptic, distant from ĩt about 5 all round, just as the axis of the Earth describes a circle round the pole oſ the ecliptic, distant ſrom it about 234 degrees. 204. When the Moons path is bent toward the eeliptie, she must cross it sooner than she would otherwise have done. The node vill appear to meet the Moon, that is, to shiſt to the westward, in antecedentiũ signorum, or to recede But if her path be bent more away from the ecliptic, she must proceed ſarther beſore she eross it, and the nodes ill shift in consequentiã, that is, will advance. Cor. 1. Thereſore, if the nodes have the situation represented in the figure, in the second and fourth quadrant, the nodes must retreat while the Moon deseribes *he aren N CA, or the arch N'OB, that is, while she passes from a node to the next quadraturee But while the Moon describes the arch AN, or the arch BN, the foree which pulls the Moon from the plane of the orbit, causes her to pass the points N' or N before she reach the ecliptie, and the node thereſore advances, while the Moon moves from quadrature to a node. It is plain, that the contrary must happen when the nodes are situated in the first and third quadrantss. They will advance while the Moon proceeds from a node to the next quadrature, and recede while she proceeds from a quadrature to the next node. Cor. 2. In each synodical revolution oſ the Moon, the nodes, on the whole, retreat. For, to take the example represented in the figure, all the while that the Moon moves from N to 4, the line M I lies between the orbit and ecliptic, and the path is continually inclining more and more towards it, and, consequently, the nodes are all this while receding They advance while the Moon moves ſfrom A to N. They retreat while she moves from N to B, and advance while she proceeds ſfrom B' to N. The time, thereſore, during which the nodes recede, exceeds that during which they advance. There will be the same difference or excess oſ the regress oſ the nodes when they are situated in the angle CE A. It is evident that the excess of the arch N C A above the arch BN or AN, is double of the distance N C oſ the node from syzigy. Thereſore the retreat or westerly motion oſ the nodes will gradually increase as they pass from syZigy to quadrature, and again decrease as the node passes from quadrature to the syzigy. Cor. 3. When the nodes are in the quadratures, the lateral foree M m is the greatest possible through the whole i . 3i revolution, because the factor 5 in the formula is then equal to radiuss In the syzigies it is nothing. The nodes make a complete revolution in 6803 2* 56 157, but with great inequality, as appears from what has been said in the preceding paragraphs. The exact determination of their motions is to be seen in Newtons Principia, B. III. Prop. 2.; and it is a very beautiſul example oſ dynamical analysiss The principal equation amounts to 1 S7 45 at its maximum, and, in other situations, it is proportional to the sine of twice the areh NC. The annual regress, computed aecording to the principles of the theory, does not diſfer tvo minutes of a degree from vhat ĩs actually observed in the heavens This wonderful eoincidence is the great boast of the doctrine oſ universal gravitationn. At the same time, the perusal of Newtons investigation vill shew that such agreement is not the obòious result of the happy simplicity of the great regulating pover; we shall there see many abstruse and delicate circumstances, which must be eonsidered and taken into the aceount before we can obtain a true statement. This motion of the nodes is accompanied by a variation of the inclination of the orbit to the ecliptic. The inelination increases, vhen the Moon is drawn from the ecliptic while leaving a node, or toward it in approaching a node. It is diminished, vhen the Moon is dravn toward the ecliptic when leaving a node, or from it in approaching a node. Therefore, vhen the nodes are situated in the ſirst and third quadrants, the inclination increases while the Moon passes from a node to the next quadrature, but it diminishes till she is 9 from the node, and then increãses till she reaches the other nodee Thereſore, in each revolution, the inclination is increased, and becomes continually greater, while the node recedes from the quadrature to the syzigy; and it is the greatest possible when the nodes are in the line of the syzigies, and it is then nearly 50 18 30. When the nodes are situated in the second and fourth quadrants, the inelination of the orbit diminishes while the Moon passes ſrom the node to the 90th degree; it is increased from thence to the quadrature, and then diminishes till the Moon reaches the other node. While the nodes are thus situated, the inclination diminishes in every revolution, and is the least oſ all When the node is in quadrature, and the Moon in syzigy, being then nearly 4 58', and it gradually increases again till the nodes reach the line of syzigy While the nodes are in the quadratures, or in the syzigies, the inclination is not sensibly changed during that revolution. Such are the general effects of the lateral ſorce Mm, that appear on a slight consideration of the circumstances of the case. A more particular account of them cannot be given in this outline of the science. We may just add, that the deduetions from the general principle agree precisely with observationn. The mathematical investigation not only points out the periods of the different inequalities, and their relation to the respecetive positions of the Sun and Moon, but also determines the absolute magnitude to vhich each of them risess The only quantity deduced ſrom mere observation is the mean inclination of the Moon's orbit. The time of the complete revolution of the nodes, and the magnitude and law of variation oſ this motion, und the change of inelination, with all its varieties, are deduced from the theory of universal gravitation. 205. There is another case of this problem, which is considerably different, namely, the satellites of Dr Herschel's planet, the planes of whose orbits are nearly perpendicular to the orhit of the planett. This problem offers some curious cases, vhich deserve the attention of the mechanician; but as they interest us merely as objects of curiosity, they have not yet been considered. 296. There is still another considerable derangement oſ the lunar motions by the action of the Sun. We have seen, that in quadrature the Moon's gravitation to the Earth is augmented ;3,, and that in sy⸗igy it is diminished,3,. Taking the whole synodical revolution to- gether, this is equivalent, nearly, to a diminution of or 535. That is to say, in consequence of the Suns action, the general gravitation of the Moon to the Earth is 535 less than if the Sun were avay. If the Sun vere away, therefore, the Moons gravitation would be 515 greater than her present mean gravitationn. The consequence vould be, that the Moon would come nearer to the Earth. As this would be done without any change on her velocity, and as she now vill be retained in a smaller orbit, she vill describe it in a proportionally less time; and we can compute exactly how near she would come before this increased gravitation will be balanced by the velocity We must conclude from this, that the mean distance and the mean period of the Moon which we observe, are greater than her natural distance and period. From this it is plain, that if any thing shall inerease or diminish the action of the Sun, it must equally increase or diminish the distance which the Moon assumes from the Earth, and the time of her revolution at that distance. Novw, there actually is such a change in the Suns action. When the Earth is in perihelio, in the beginning of January, she is nearer the Sun than in July by I part in 80; consequently, the ratio of EM to ES is increased by à, or in the ratio of 30 to 3I. But her gravitation (ani consequently the Moons) to the Sun is increased 4;, or in the ratio of 80 to 82. Thereſore the disturbing force is increased by I part in 10 nearly. The Moon must therefore retire farther from the Earth I part in 1790. She must describe a larger orbit, and employ a greater time. We can compute exactly vhat is the extent of this change. The sidereal period of the Moon is 2 T 43, or 39348. This must be incrensed b,75, because the Moon retains the same velocity in the enlarged orbit. This will make the period 39365, which exceeds the other 22. The observed diſference between a lunation in Jun- uary and one in July somewhat exceeds 25. This, wher reduced in the proportion of the synodical to the periodical revolution, agrees with this mechanical conclusion with great exactness, vhen the computation is made with due attention to every cireumstance that can aſfect the conclusion. For it must be remarked, that the computation here given proceeds on the legitimacy of assuming a general diminution of ,1, of the Moons gravitation as equivalent to the variable change of gravity that really takes place. In the particular circumstances of the case, this is very nearly exact. The true method is to take the average oſ all the disturbing ſorces M through the quadrant, multiplying each by the time of its action. And here Euler makes a sagacious remark, that if the diameter oſ the Moons orbit had exceeded its present magnitude in a very considerable proportion, it would scarcely have been possible to assign the period in hich she would have revolved round the Earth; and the greatest part of the methods by which the problem has been solved could not have been employed. 297. There still remains an anomaly of the lunar motions that has greatly puzzled the cultivators of physical astronomy. Dr Halley, when comparing the ancient Chaldean observations with those of modern times, in order to obtain an accurate measure of the period of the Moons revolution, found, that some observations made by the Arabian astronomers, in the eighth and ninth centuries, did not agree with this measure When the lunar period was deduced from a comparison of the Chaldean observations vith the Arabian, the period was sensibly greater than vhat was deduced from a comparison of the Arabian and the modern observations; s0 that the Moon's mean motion seems to have accelerated a little. This conclusion was confirmed by breaking each of these long intervals into partss. When the Chaldean and Alexandrian observations were compared, they gave a longer period than the Alexaudrian compared ith the Arabian of the cighth century; and this last period excceded what is deduced ſrom a comparison oſ the Arabian with the modern observations; and even the comparison of the modern observations with each other shews a continued diminution. This conjecture was received by the mechanical philosophers with hesitation, because no reason could be assigned for the acceleration; and the more that the Newtonian philosophy has been cultivated, the more confidently did it appear that the mean distances and periods could sustain no change from the mutual action of the planets. Nay, M. de ln Grange has at last demonstrated, that in the solar system, as ĩt exists, this is strietly true, as to any change that vill be permaent: æall is periodical and eompensatory. Yet, as observation also improved, this aceeleration of the Moon's mean motion became undeniable and conspicuous, and ĩt is noW admitted by every astronomer, at the rate of about II' in a century, and her change of longitude inereases in the duplicate ratio of the times. Various attempts have been made to account for this acceleration. It was imagined by several, that it was owing to the resistance of the celestial spaces, which, by diminishing the progressive velocity of the Moon, caused her to ſall within her preceding orbit, approaching the Earth continually n a sort oſ elliptical spira. But the free motion of the tãils of comets, the rare matter of which seems o meet with no sensible resistance, rendered this explanation unsatisſactory. Others were disposed to think, that gravity did not operate instantaneously through the whole extent of its influence. The application of this principle did not seem to be obvious, nor its effects to be very clear or defmite. At last, M. de la Place discovered the cause of this perplexing fact; and in a dissertation read to the Royal Academy of Sciences in 1785, he shews, that the acceleration of the Moons mean motion necessarily arises from a small change in the eccentricity oſ the Earths orbit round the Sun, whieh is now diminishing, and vill continue to diminish for many centuries, by the mutual gravitation of the planetss. He was led to the discovery by observing, in the series which expresses the inerease oſ the lunar period by the disturbing force of the Sun (a series formed oſ sines and cosines of the Moons angular motion and their multiples), a term equal to ,35 of her angular motion multiplied by the square of the eccentricity of the Earths orbit. Consequently, vhen this eccentricity becomes smaller, the natural period of the Moon is less enlarged by the Sun's action, and therefore, if the Earth's eccentricity continue to diminish, so will the lunar period, and this in a duplicate proportion. Without entering into the discussion of this analysis, which is abundantly complicated, ve may see the general effect of a diminution of the Earth's eccentricity in this manne. The ratio oſ the cube of the mean distance of the Earth from the Sum to the cube oſ her perihelion distance, is greater than the ratio of the cube ofſ her aphelion distance to that of the mean distance. Hence it follows, that the increase oſ the mean lunar period, during the smaller distances of the Earth ſrom the Sun, is greater than its diminution during her greater distances; and the sum of all the lunations, during a complete revolution of the Earth, exceeds the sum oſ the lunations that would have happened in the same time, had the Earth remained at her mean distance from the Sun. Therefore, as the Earth's eccentricity diminishes, the lunar period also diminishes, approximating more and more to her period, undisturbed by the change in the Sun's action. M. de la Place finds the diminution in a century = 1I,185, which differs little from that assumed by Mayer from a comparison of observations. This centurial change oſ angular velocity must produce a change in the space described, that is, in the Moon's longitude, in the duplicate proportion of the time, as in any uniſormly accelerated motion. Therefore 117,135, multiplied by the square of the number oſ centuries forvard or backward, will give the correction of the Moons longitude computed by the present tabless La Place finds, that, in going back to the Chaldean observations, ve must employ another term (nearly 75 of a second) multiplied by the cube of the number oſ centuries. With these corrections, the computation of the Moon's place agrees with all observations, ancient and modern, with most wonderful accuracy; so that there no longer remains any phenomenon in the system which is not deducible from the Newtonian gravitation. 208. We should, beſore concluding this account oſ the perturbations of the planetary motions, pay some attention to the motions oſ the other secondary planets, and particularly of Jupiters satellites, seeing that the exact knoledge of their motions is almost as conducive to the improvement oſ navigation and geography as that of the lunar motions. But there is no room for this discussion, and we must reſer to the dissertations of Wargentin, Prosperin, La Place, and others, who have jtudied the operation of physical causes on those little planets with great assiduity and judgment, and with the greatest success The little system of Jupiter and his satellites has been of immense service to the philosophical study of the whole solar system. Their motions are so rapid, that, in the course of a few years, many synodical periods are accomplished, in which the perturbations arising from their mutual actions return again in the same order. Nay, such synodical periods have been observed as bring the whole system again into the same relative situation oſ its difſerent bodies And, in cases where this is not accurately accomplished, the deficiency introduces a small difference between the perturbations of any period and the corresponding perturbations of the preceding one; by vhich means another and much longer period is indicated, n vhich this difference goes through all its varieties, swelling  a maximum, and again diminishing to nothing. Thus the system of Jupiter and his satellites, as a sort oſ epitome of the great solar system, has suggested to the sagacious philosopher the proper way of studying the great system, namely, by looking out for similar periods in its anomalies and by boldly asserting the reality of such corresponding equations as can be shewn to result from the operation oſ universal gravitationn. The fact is, that we have now the most demonstrative knowledge of many such periods and cquations, vhich could not be deduced ſrom the observations oſ many thousand years. In the course of this investigation, M. de la Grange has made an important observation, which he has demonstrated in the most incontrovertible manner, namely, that it necessarily results from the small eccentricity of the planetary orbitstheir small inelination to each otherthe immense bulk oſ the Sunand from the planets all moving in one directionthat all the perturbations that are observed, nay all that can exist in this system, are periodical, and are compensated in opposite points of every geriod. He shews also that the greatest perturbations are so moderate, that none but an astronomer will observe any diſference between this perturbed state and the mean state of the system. The mean distances and the mean periods remain for ever the same. In short, the whole assemblage will continue, almost to eternity, in a state fit for its present purposes, and not distinguishable from its present state, except by the prying eye of an astronomer. Cold, we think, must be the heart that is not aſfected by this mark oſ beneſicent wisdom in the Contriver oſ the magniſicent fabrie, s0 maniſest in selecting for its conneeting principle a power so admirably fitted for continuing to answer the purposes of its first formationn. And he must be little susceptible of moral impression who does not ſeel himsel? highly obliged to the Being vho has made him capable of perceiving this display of wisdom, and has attached to this perception sentiments so pleasing and de- lightful. The extreme simplicity of the constituſion of the sOlar system is perhaps the most remarkable feature of its beauty. To this circumstance are ve indebted for the Pleasure afforded by the contemplation. For it is this alone that has allowed our limited understanding to acquire such a comprehensive body of vell-founded knowledge, far exceeding, both in extent and in accuracy, any thing attained in other paths oſ philosophical research. But we have not yet seen all the capahilities of this wonderſul?power oſ nature. Let us thereſore still ſollow our excellent leader in a new path of investigation. qf the Figures of the Planets. 299. Sir Isaac Newton, having so happily explained all the phenomena of progressive motion exhihited by the heavenly bodies, by shewing that they are all, without exception, modified examples of deſlection towards one another, in the inverse duplieate ratio of the distances, was induced to examine the other motions observed in some oſ those bodies, to seæ what modiſication these motions received by the influence of universal gravitation. The Sun, and several planets, turn round their axis. The study oſ celestial mechanism is not complete, till we see whether this kind oſ motion is in any way influenced by gravitation, Tt does not appear, at first consideration, that there can be any great mystery in the mere rotation of a body round its axis. It seems to be one of the simplest mechanical questions. But the ſact is just the opposite. Before the rotative motion that we observe in our Earth ean be secured, in the way in which we see it actually performed, adjustments are necessary, which are very abstruse, and required all the sagacity oſ Newton to discover and appreciate; and iĩt is acknowledged that this is the department of physical astronomy where his acuteness of discernment appears the most remarkable. It is alæo the class of phe- nomena in vhich the effects oſ universal gravitation are most convincingly seen. For this reason, some more notiœ vill be taken of the rotation of the planets, and oſ ĩits consequences, than is usually done in our elementary treatises But, as in the other departments, so here, it is only the more simple and general ſacts that can be considered. To gO a very small step beyond these, engages us at once in the most diſficult problems, which have occupied and still occupy the first mathematicians of Europe, and require all the resources oſ their science. Sueh discussion, however, would be unsuitable here But without some attempt of this kind, ve must remain ignorant of the mechanism of some phenomena, more familiar and important than many of those which we have already discussed. When a body turns round an axis, each particle describes a cirele, to which this axis is perpendicular. Now we know that a particle oſf matter cannot describe a cirele, unless some deflecting force retain it in the periphery. In coherent masses, this retaining force is supplied by the cohesion. But even this is a limited thing A stone may be 50 briskly vhirled about in a sling, that the cord will break. Grindstones are sometimes whirled about in our manuſactures vith such rapidity that they split, and the pieces ſly off vith prodigious forcee. If matters be lying loose on the surſace of a revolving planet, their gravitation may be insuſficient to retain them in that velocity of rotation. In every case, the force which actually retains such loose bodies on the surſace can be found only in their weight; and part of it is thus expended, and they continue to press the ground only with the remainder. If the velocity of rotation be increased to a certain degree, it may require the whole weight of the body for its supply. If the velocity still increase, the body is not retained, but thrown off. If this Earth turn round in 84 minutes, things lying on the equator might remain there; but they would not press the ground, nor stretch the thread of a plummet. For this is precisely the time in which a planet would circulate round the Earth, close to the surface, moving about I7 times faster than a canmon bal. The weight of the body, deflecting it 16 feet in a second, just keeps it in the cireumference of a circle close to the surface oſ the Earth. The Earth, turning as ſast, will have the planet always immodiately above the same point oſ its surface; and the planet will not appear to have any weight, because it will not descend, but keep hovering over the same spot. If the rotation were still siſter, every thing would be thrown off, as we see vater ſlirted ſfrom a mop briskly whirled round. S800. As things are really adjusted, this does not happen. But yet there is a certain measureable part of the weight of any body expended in keeping it at rest, in the place where it lies loose At the equator, a body lying on the ground describes, in one second, an arch oſ 1525 feet nearly. This deviates from the tangent nearly ,47 oſ an inch. This is very nearly ,, part oſ 16; feet, the space through which gravity, or its heaviness, would cause a stone to fall in that time. Hence ve must infer that the centrifugal tendency arising from rotation is ,15 oſ the sensible weight of a hody on the equator, and ,3, oſ its real weight. Were this body thereſore taken to the pole, it would manifest a greater heaviness. If, at the equator, it drew out the scale of a spring steelyard to the division 288, it would draw it to 289 at the pole. 301I. M. Richer, a French mathematician, going to Cayenne in 1672, was directed to make some astronomical observations there, and was provided vwith a pendulum clock for this purpose. He fſound that his clock, which had been careſully adjusted to mean time at Paris, lost above two minutes every day, and he was obliged to shorten the pendulum ; of an inch beſore it kept right time. Hence he concluded, that a heavy body dropped at Cayenne would not fall 193 inches in a second. It would fall only about 1925. Richer immediately wrote an-account of this 6 very singular diminution of gravity. It was scouted by almost all the philosophers of Europe, but has been confirmed by many repetitions of the experiment. Here then is a direot prooſ that the heaviness of a body, whether considered as a mere pressure, or as an accelerating foree, is employed, and in part expended, in keeping hodies united to a whirling planet. 302. These considerations are not nev. Even in ancient times, men of reflection entertained such thoughts. The celebrated Roman general Polybius, one of the most intelligent philosophers of antiquity, is quoted by Strabo, as saying, that in consequence of the Earths rotation, every body was made lighter, and that the globe itself swelled out in the middle Were it not so, says he, the waters of the ocean vould all run to the shores oſ the torrid zone, and leave the polar regions dry. Dr Hooke is the first modern philosopher vho professed this opinionn. Mr Huyghens, however, is the first who gave it the proper attention. Occupied at the time of Richer's remark vwith his pendulum clocks, he took great interest in this observation at Cayenne, and instantly perceived the true cause of the retardation of Richer's clock. He perceived that pendulums must vibrate more slowly, in proportion as their situation removes them ſarther ſrom the axis of the Earth; and he assigned the proportion of the retardation in different places. 303. Resuming this subject some time aſter, it oceurred to him, that unless the Earth be protuberant all around the equator, the ocean must overſlow the lands, inereasing in depth till the height of the water compensated ſor its diminished gravity. He considers the condition oſ the water in a canal reaching from the surface of the equator to the centre of the Earth (suppose the eanal C Q Fig. 5.) and there communicating with a canal C N reaching from the centre to the polee The water in the last must retain all its natural gravity, because its particles do not describe circles round the axiss But every particle in the column C Q reaching to the surſace of the equator must have its veight diminished in proportion to its distance from the centre of the globee. Therefore the whole diminution will be the same as if each particle lost half as much as the outermost particle losess. This is very plainn. Thereſore these two columns cannot balance each other at the centre, unless the equatoreal column be longer than the polar column by ;35 (for the extremity of this column loses 7ĩ5 of its weight by the centrifugal ſorce employed in the rotation.) Being an excellent and zealous geometer, this subject seemed to merit his serious study, and he investigated the form that the ocean must acquire so as to he in equilibrio. This he did by inquiring what will be the position of a plummet in any latitudle This he knew must be perpendicular to the surſace of still water. On the supposition oſ gravity directed to the centre of the Earth, and equal at all distances from that centre, he constructed the meridional curve, which should in every point have the tangent perpendicular to the direction oſ a plummet determined by him on these principles. 804. At this very time, another circumstance gave a peculiar interest to this question of the figure oſ the Earth. The magnificent projeet of measuring the whole areh of the meridian which passes through France was then carrying on. It seemed to result from the comparison oſf the lengths of the diſſferent portions of this arch, that the degrees increased as they were more southerly. This made the academicians employed in the measurement conelude that the Earth was of an egg-like shape. This was quite incompatible with the reasoning of Mr Huyghens The contest was earried on for a long while vith great pertinacity, and some of the first mathematicians oſ the age abetted the opinion of those astronomers, and the honour of France was made a party in the dispute. The opinion of Mr Huyghens, the greatest ornament oſ Vou. III. O academy, eould not prevail; indeed his inſerences were such, in some respects, that even the impartial mathematicians vere dissatisſied with them. The form which he assigned to the meridian was very remarkable, consisting of two paraboloidal curves, vhich had their vertex in the poles, and their branches intersected each other at the equator, there forming an angular ridge, elevated about seven miles above the inseribed sphere No such ridge had heen ohserved by the navigators oſ that age, vho had often crossed the equator. Nor had any person on shore at the line ohserved that two plummets near each other were not parallel, but sensibly approached each other. All this was unlike the ordinary gradations of nature, in which we observe nothing abrupt. 305. While this question was 50 heenly agitated in France, Mr Newton vas engaged in the speculations which have immortalized his name, and it was to him an interesting thing to know what form of a whirling planet vas compatible with an equilibrium of all the forces which act on its parts. He thereſore took the question up in ĩts most simple form. He supposed the planet completely ſluid, and thereſore every particle is at liberty to change its place, if it be not in perfect equilibrium. The particles all attract one another with a force in the inverse duplieate ratio of the distance, and they are at the same time actuated by a centriſugal tendeney, in consequence oſ the rotation; or, to express it more accurately, part of those mutual attractions is employed in keeping the particles in their different circles of rotation. He demonstrated that this vas possible, if the globe have the form of an elliptial spheroid, compressed at the poles, and protuberant at the equator vhr part oſ the axiss He also pointed out the phenomena by which this may be ascertained, namely, the variation of gravity as we recede from the equator to the poles, shewing that the increments of sensible gravity are as the squares oſ the sines of the latitudee This can easily be decided by experiments vith nice pendulum clocks. He shewed als that the remaining gravity, on different parts oſ the Earths surface, is inversely proportional to the distance from the centre, when estimated in the direction of- the centre, &o. &c. His demonstration of the precise elliptical ſorm consists in proving two things: lst, That on this supposition, gravity is alays perpendicular to the surſace oſ the spheroid: 2d, That all rectilineal canals leading from the centre to the surface vill balance one another. Therefore the ocean vwill maintain its ſorm. It was some time before the philosophy of Newton could prevail in France over the hypothesis oſ the French philosopher Des Cartes; and the great mathematician Bernoulli endeavoured to shew that the oblong ſorm of the Earth which had been demonstrated (he says) by the measurement of the degrees, was the effect of the pressure of the vortices in which the Earth was carried about. 806. Mr Hermann, a mathematician of most respectable talents, took another view of the question of the figure of the Earth. Newton had demonstrated, in the most convincing mamer, that particles gravitated to the centre of similar solids, or portions of a solid, with forces proportional to their distances from the cœentree Hermann availed himself of this, and of another theorem of Newton founded on it, viz. that superfſicial gravity in different latitudes is inversely as the distance from the centree But he observed that Newton had by no means demonstrated the elliptical form, but had merely assumed it, or, as it were, guessed at it. This is indeed true, and his application is made by means of the vulgar rule of false positionn Hermann, therefore, set himself to inquire what form a ſluid will assume when turning round an axis, its purticles situated in the same diameter gravitating to the centre proportionally to their distance; yet exhibiting a superſicial gravity in different parts inversely as the distance ſfrom the centre. He found it to be an ellipse, with such a protuberancy, - that the radius of equator is to the semiaxis in the subduplicate ratio of the primitive equatoreal gravity to the remaining equatorenl gravity. This gives the same proportion of the axes which had been assigned by Huyghens, though accompanied by a very diſferent ſorm. He then inverted his process, and demonstrated the perpendicularity of gravity to the surface, the equilibrium of canals, and some other conditions that appeared indispensable; and he found all rightt. This confirmed him in his theory, and he found fault with Dr D. Gregory, the commentator oſ Newton, for adhering to Newton's form of the ellipse He defied them to point out any fault in his ovn demonstration oſ the elliptical figure, and considered this as sufficient for proving the inaccuracy of the Newtonian conjecture, for it could get no higher name. 807. By very slow degrees, the French academicians began to acknowledge the compressed form oſ the Earth, and o re-examine their observations, by which it had seemed that the degrees increased to the southwardc. They nov affected to find that their measurement had been good, but that some cireumstances had been overlooked in the caleulations, vhich should have been taken into the aceount But they were not aware that they were now vindicating the goodness oſ their instruments, and oſ their eyesight at the expence of their judgment. All these things made the problem of the figure oſ the Earth extremely interesting to the great mathematical philosophers. Newton took no part in the further discussion, being satisſied with the evidence which he had ſor his on determination of the precise species oſ the terraqueous spheroid. His philosophy gradually acquired the ascendaney; but the comparison made of the degrees of the meridian, argued a smaller ellipticity than he had assigned to the Earth, on the supposition oſ uniſorm density and primitive fluidity He had, however, suſſiciently pointed out ha varieties of ellipticity which might arise ſrom a differof density in the interior partss These were acquies- cœd in, and the mathematicians speculated on the ways by which the observations and the theory oſ universal gravitation might be adapted to each other. But, all this hile, the original problem was considered as too diſficult to he treated in any case remarkably deviating from a sphere; and even this case vas solved by Newton and his followers only in an indirect manner. S308. The first person who attempted a direet general solution, vas Mr James Stirling In 1785, he communicated to the Royal Society of London two elegant propositions, (but without demonstration) which determine the form oſf a homogeneous spheroid turning round its axis, and which, when applied to the particular case oſ the Earth, perſeetly eoincided with Newtons determination. In 1787, Mpr Clairaut communicated to our Royal Society, and also to the Royal Academy at Paris, very elaborate and elegant perſormances on the same subjeet, which he afterwards enlarged in a separate publieation. This is the completest work on the subjeet, and is full of the most eurious and valuable research, in which are discussed all the cireumstances which can afſect the question. It is also remarkable for an example oſ candour, very rare among rivals in literary fame. The author, in extending his memoir to a more complete vork, quits his own method of investigation, though remarkable for its perspicuity and neatness, for that of another mathematician, because it was superior; and this with unaffected acknowledgment of its superiority. The results of Clairaut's theory, perſeetly coincide vith the Newtonian theory, making the equatoreal diameter to the polar diameter as 231 to 230, though it is agreed, by all the mathenmticians, that Newton's method had a chance of being inaccurate. So true is the saying of Daniel Bernoulli, when treating this subjeet in his theory of the tides,  The sugucity of that great man (Newion) s sam cleorly through a mist uiut othera can soareely dis:  cover through a microscope : Mr Stirling had said, that the revolving ſfigure was not an accurate elliptical spheroid, but approached infinitely near to it. Mr Clairaut's solutions, in most cases, suppos the spheroid very nearly a sphere, or suppose lines and angles equal which are only very nearly soo. Without this allowance, the treatment of the problem seemed impraeticablee. This made Mr Stirling's assertion more credited; and we apprehend that it became the general opinion, that the solutions obtainable in our present state of mathematical knowledge were only approximations, exact indeed, to any degree that we please, in the cases exhibited in the figures of the planets, but still they were but approximations. 309. But, in 1740, Mr MLaurin, in a dissertation on the tides, which shared the prize given by the Academy of Paris, demonstrated, in all the rigour and elegance oſ ancient geometry, that an homogeneous elliptical spheroid, of any eccentricity whatever, if tumming in a proper time round its axis, vill for ever preserve its form He gave the rule for investigating this form, and the ratio of its axes. His final propositions to this purpose, are the same that Mr Stirling had communicated without demonstration. This performance was much admired, and settled all doubts about the figure of a homogeneous spheroid turning round its axis. It is indeed equally remarkable for its simplicity, its perspicuity, and its elegance Mr McLaurin had no occasion to prosecute the subjeet beyond this simple case. Proceeding on his fundamental propositions, the mathematieal philosophers have made many important additions to the theory. But it still presents many questions oſf most diſficuit solution, yet intimately conhected with the phenomena of the solar system. n this elementary outline of physical astronomy, we cannot disouss those things in detail. But it would be a pital defeet not to include the general theory of the ſigure l ai which turn round their axes. No more, how- ever, will be attempted than to shew that a homogenecus elliptionl spheroid will answer all the conditions that are required, and to give a general notion of the change which a variable density will produce in this figure.* The following lemma, ſrom Mr M⸗Lauriu, must be premised. 810. Let AEBQ and aebq (Fig. 37.) be two concentric and similar ellipses, having their shorter axes A B and a b inciding. Let P a L touch the interior ellipse in the extremity a of the shorter axis, to which let P K, a chord of the exterior ellipse be parallel, and therefore equal. Let the chords a ſ and a 2 of the interior ellipse make equal angles with the axis, and jom their extremities by the chord ſ~ perpendieular to it in i. Draw P F and P G parallel to af and a g and drav F H and P I perpendicular to P K. Then, PF together with P G are equal to twice a i, when PF and PũG lie on different sides of P X. But if they are on the same side (as P F and P G) then æa ĩ is equal to the difference of P F and PG. Draw Kæ parallel to P G or a g, and thereſore equal to PF, being equally inclined to KP. Draw the diameter M Cæ, bisecting the ordimates Xæ, PG, and a g, in m, 5, and z, and cuttiig P K n n. BY similarity of triangles, ve have EKm: Kn Ps: P n, mux:a C,æ ag: ab,  The student will consult, with ad vantage, the original dissertations of Mr Clairaut and Mr M Lauiũi; und the great additions made by the last in his valusble work on Fluxions. The Cosmogruphia of Frisius, also contains a very excellent epitome oſ all that has been done beſore his time; and the Mechanique Celeste of La Place, contains some very curious and recondite additions. A work of F. Roscovich, on the figure oſ the Earth, has peculiar merit. This author, by employing geometrical expressions oſ the acting forces, wherever it can be done, gives us very clear ideas of the subject. gravitation to each, and reduced them all to one direction, the aggregate of the reduced forces is the whole gravitation oſ the particle estimated in that directionn. The application of this is greatly expedited by the ſollowing theorem. 3127 Two particles similarly situated in respect of similar solids, that is to say, situated in similar points oſ homologous lines, have their whole gravitations proportional to any homologous lines of the solids. For, we can draw through the two particles straight lines similarly posited in respect oſ the solids, and then draw planes passing through those lines, and through similar points of the solidss. The seetions oſ the solids made by those two planes must be similar, for they are similarly placed in similar solidss We can then draw other planes through the same two straight lines, containing with the former planes very small equal angless The sections of these two planes will also be similar, and there will be comprehended between them and the two former planes similar slices of the two solids. We can now divide the sliees into two serieses of similar pyramids, by drawing planes such as GP E, gpe, and F PD, fpad, oſ Fig. 88. the points P and ꝓ being supposed in different lines, related to each of the two solidss. By the reasonings employed in the last proposition, it appears that, when the whole of each slice is occupied by such pyramids, the gravitations to the corresponding pyramids are all in one proportionn. Therefore, the gravitation compounded of them all is in the same proportion As the whole of each of the two similar slices may be thus occupied by serieses of similar and similarly situated pyramids, so the whole of each of the two similar solids may be occupied by similar slices, consisting of such pyramids. And as the compound gravitations to those slices are similarly formed, they are not õnly in the proportion of the homologous lines of the solids, but they are also in similar directions. There- S316. () All particles equally distant from the plane oſ the equator gravitate towards that plane with equal forces. Let P be the particle, Fig. 87.) and Pa a line perpendieular to the axis, and parallel to the equator E Q. Let P d be perpendicular to the equator. Let a æ b  he the section of a concentric and similar spheroid, having its axis a b coinciding vith A B. Draving any ordinate ſę to the diameter ab of the interior ellipse, join a f and a g, and draw P F and P G parallel to a f and a g, and therefore making equal angles with P d K. Let fę cut a b in i, and drav F H, G I, perpendicular to P I. The lines PF and P G may be considered as the axes of two very slender pyramids, comprehended between the plane of the figure and another plane intersecting it in the lIme P a L, and making with it a very minute angle. These pyramids are constituted according to the conditions described in art. 811. The lines a f, a g, are, in like manner, the axes of tvo pyramids, hose sides are parallel to those of P F and P G. The gravitation of P to the matter contained in the pyramids P F and P G, and the gravitation of a to the pyramids a f and a g, are as the lines PF, PG, af, and a g, respectively. These gravitations, estimated in the direction P d, a C, perpendicular to the equator, are as the lines P H, PI, ai, a i, respectively. Now it has been shewn, (810.) that PH + PI ure equal to a i +a i. Therefore the gravitations of P o this pair of pyramids, when estimated perpendicularly to the equator, is equal to the gravitation of a to the corresponding pyramids lying on the interior ellipse a e b ꝗ. It is evident, that by carrying the ordinate ſ& along the whole diameter from b o a, the lines af; a g, will diverge more and mote (always equally) from a b, and the pyramids of which these lines are the axes, vill thus occupy the whole surſace oſ the interior ellipsee And the pyramids on the axes P F and PG, vill, in like manner, occupy the whole oſ the exterior ellipse It is also evi- contained in the interior spheroid, estimated in the same manner. This gravitation will certainly be in the direetion perpendicular to the plane of the equator of the two spheroids. For the slices which compose the solid, all passing through the generating ellipse AE B Q, may be taken in pairs, each pair consisting of equal and similar slices, equally inclined to the plane of the generating ellipse. The gravitations to each slice of a pair are equal, and equally inclined to the plane A E B Q. Therefore they compose a gravitation in the direction which biseets the angle contained by the slices, that is, in the direetion oſ the plane A E B Q, and parallel to its axis A B, or perpendicular to the equator. From all this it follows, that the gravitation of P to the whole spheroid, when estimated in the direction P d perpendicular to the plane of its equator, is equal to the gravitation of a to the interior spheroid a e b 5, vhich is evidently in the same direction, being directed to the centre C. In like manner, the gravitation of another particle ? ſin the line Pa L), in a direction perpendicular to the equator oſ the spheroid, is equal to the gravitation oſ a to the interior spheroid a e bq; for  may be conceived as on the surface oſ a concentric and similar spheroid. When thus situated, it is not affected by the matter in the spheroidal stratum without it, and therefore its gravitation is 1o be estimated in the same way with that of the particle P. Consequently, the gravitation of P and of , estimated in a direction perpendicular to the equator, are equal, each being equal to the central gravitation of a to the spheroid a e bq. Thereſore; all particles equidistant from the equator gravitate equally toward it. 3I7. (d) BYy reasoning in the same manner, ve prove, that the gravitation of a particle P in the direction P q, perpendicular to the axis A B, is cqual to the gravitation l of the particle d to the ooncentric similar spheroid à, ꝗ15 and therefore all particles equidistant from the axis gravitate equally in a direetion perpendicular to it. 318. (e) The gravitation oſ a particle to the sphervid, estimated in a direetion perpendicular to the equator, or perpendicular to the axis, is proportional to ĩts distance from the equator, or from the axis. For the gravitation of P in the direction P d is equal to the gravitution of a to the spheroid a æ b 7. But the gravitation of a o the spheroid a e b q, is o the gravitation of A to AE BQ as a C to AC (812.) Thereſore the gravitation of P in the direction P d is to the gravitation of A to the spheroid AEBQ as aC to A, or as Pd to AC; and the same may be proved of any other particle The gravitation of A is to the gravitation of any particle, as the distance AC is to the distance of that particlee. All particles, therefore, gravitate towards the equator proportionally to their distances from it. In the same manner it is demonstrated, that the gravitation of E to the spheroid in the direction E C perpendicular to the axis, is to the gravitation of any particle P in the same direction as E C to Pq, the distance of that particle from the axis. Therefore, &e. 319. &) We are noW able to ascertain the direction and intensity of the compound or absolute gravitation of any particle P. For this purpose, let A represent the gravitation oſ the purticle A in the pole, and E the gravitation of a particle E on the surface of the equator; also, let the force with vhich P is urged in the direction P d be expressed,by the symbol 7, P d, and let , P a express its tendency in the direction P a. We have, ſ, Pd: A=Pd: AC and A: EA: E and E: f, Pa mEC: Pa. Thereſore f, Pd: f, Pau 5m Pd AxEC: ACXE  Pa. Now, make d C: dv = A X EC: E x A, and drav P u. We have nov ſ, Pd: f, Pa = Pd xdC: Paxdv, =Pd xPa: Pa dv, Pd: dvc. P is thereſore urged by two forees, in the direetions P d and P a, and these forces are in the proportion of P d and d v. Therefore the compound foree has the direction P v. Moreover, this compound force is to the gravity at the pole, or the gravitation of the particle A, as P v to A C. For the force P 9 ĩs to the force P d as P v to P d; and the ſorce P d ĩs to A as P d to AC. Thereſore the foree Po is to A as Po to AC. In like manner, it may be compared with the force at E. Make a C: aumE  CA: A x CE. We shall then have f, Pa: f, Pd/DPa: a u; and the force in the direction P a, vhen compounded with that in the direction P d, form a force in the direction P u, and having to the ſorce at E the proportion of Pu to E C. Thus have we obtained the direction of gravitation for any mdividual particle on the surface, and its magnitude vwhen compared vith the forces at A and at E, which are supposed known. 320. () But iĩt is necessary to have the measure of the accumulated force or pressure occasioned by the gravitation of a eolumn or row of particles. Drav the tangent ET, and take any portion of it, such as ET, to represent the gravitation of the particle E. Join CT, cutting the perpendicular dà in . Since the gravitations of particles in one diameter are as their distances from the centre (15.) d will express the gravitation of a particle . Thus, the gravitation of the whole eolumn E C vill be represented by the area of the triangle CET, and the gravitation of the part E d, or the pressure exerted by it at d, is represented by the aren E T d. We may also conveniently express the pressure oſ the column E C E xEC at C by T and in like manner, A hc expresses the weight of the column AC, or the pressure exerted by at C. Should we express the gravitation of E by a line ET equal to E C, the weight of the whole column E C would i z be expressed by B and that oſ the portion E d by 2 2 BCC or by its equa BEæ 40 We see, also, that whatever value we assign to the force E, the gravitations or pressures of the columns E C and E d are proportional to EC?, and E C?d C, or to E C and Ed- d Q. This remark vill be frequently referred to. 321. From these observations it appears, that the two columns AC and E C vill exert equal or unequal pressures at the centre C, according to the adjustment of the forces in the direction of the axis, and perpendicular to the axis Iſ the ellipse do not turn round an axis, then, in order that the fluid in the columns A C and E C may press equally at C, we must have A x A Cæ E x EC, or AC : ECE: A The gravitation at the pole must be to that at the equator, as the radius of the equator to the smiaxis. But we shall find, on examination, that such a proportion of the gravitations at A and E cannot result solely from the mutual gravitation oſ the particles oſ a homogeneous spheroid, and that this spheroid, if fluid, and at rest, cannot preserve its form. 822. The six preceding articles ascertain the mechanical state of a particle placed any where in a homogeneous spheroid, inasmuch as it is aſfeeted solely by the mutual gravitation to all the other particles We are now to inquire what conditions of ſorm and gravitating force vill produce an exact equilibrium in every particle oſ an elliptical spheroid of gravitating fluid when turning round its axis. For this purpose, it is necessary, in the ſirst place, that the direction of gravity, affected by the centrifugal > oſ rotation, be every where perpendicular to the sur- face of the spheroid, otherwise the waters would flow off toward that quarter to which gravity incliness Secondly, all canals reaching from the centre to the surface must balance at the centre, otherwise the preponderating colIumn will subside, and press up the other, and the form of the surſace vill change And, lastly, any particle of the whole mass must be in equilibrio, being equally pressed in every directionn. These three conditions seem suſficient for ensuring the equilibrium of the whole. 3238. These conditions will be secured in an elliptical fluid spheroid of uniform density turning round its axis, if the gravity at the pole be io the equatorial gravity, diminished by the centrifugol force arising from the rolation, as the radius of the equator to the semiais. We shall first demonstrate, that in this case gravity will be every where perpendicular to the spheroidal surface. Let ꝓ express the polar gravity, æ the primitive equatorial gravity, and ę the centriſugal force at the surface oſf the equator, and let e c,1, be the sensible gravity remaining at the equator. Then, by hypothesis, ve have P: :2CE: CA. Considering the state oſ any individual particle P on the surface of the spheroid, we perceive, that that part of its compound gravitation which is in a direction perpendicular to the plane oſ the equator is not aſfected by the rotation. It still is, therefore, to the force ꝓ at the pole as P d to AC (18.) But the other constituent of the whole gravitation of P, which is estimated perpendicular to the axis, is diminished by the centrifugal force of rotation, and this diminution is in proportion 1o its distance from the axis, that is, in proportion to this primitive constituent of its whole gravitationn. Therefore, its remaining gravity, in a direction perpendicular to the axis, is still in the proportion of its distance from it. And this is the case with every individual particle Each particle, thereſore, may still be considered as urged only by two forces; one oſ which is perpendicular to the equator, Vot. III. r and proportional to its distance ſrom it; and the other is perpendicular to the axis, and proportional to its distance from it. Therefore, if we draw a line P v u, s0 that d C may be to dv as p X E C to s X AC, Pv will be the direction of the compound force of gravity at P, as aſfected by the rotation. But by hypothesis : 25 E C: AC; therefore ꝓ x EC: s  AC EC: AC, and EC: ACC dC: d v,Pu: Pv. But, by conic sections, if Pu be to P as E C to AC, the line P v u is perpendicular to the tangent to the ellipse in the point P, and therefore o the spheroidal surface, or to the surface oſ the still ocean. Thus, then, the first condition is secured, and the superſicial waters of the ocean will have no tendency to move in any direction. Having therefore ascertained a suitable direction of the affected gravitation of P, we may next inquire into its intensity. 324. The sensible gravity oſ any superficial particle is every where to the polar gravity as the line Pu (the normal terminating in the axis) to the radius of meridional curvature at the pole; and it is to the sensible gravity at the equator as the portion P v of the same normal terminating in the equator is to the radius of meridional curvature at the equator. For it was shewn (819.) to be to the force at E as P u to E C. If, therefore, the radius of the equator be taken as the measure oſf the gravitation there, P u vill measure the sensible gravitation at P. And since the ultimate situation of the point u, when P is at the pole, is the centre of curvature of the ellipse at A, the mdius of curvature there will measure the polar gravity. That is, the sensible gravity at the equator is to the grvity at the pole, as the radius of the equator to the radius of polar curvature By a perſectly similar process of reasoning, it is proved, that if the gravity at the pole be measured by A C, the gravity at P is measured by P », and ai: the equator by the radius of ourvature of the ellipse in E. 325. Cor. . The sensible gravity in every point P of the surface is reciprocally as the perpendicular C t from the centre on the tangent in that point. For every where in the ellipse, Ct x Pu / CE?, and Cſ X P r CA, as is well known. 8326. Cor. 2 The central gravity of every superficial particle P, that is, its absolute gravity P u, or P u estimated in the direction P C, is inversely proportional to its distance from the centre, that is, the central gravity at P is to the central gravity at E as E C to P C, and to the polar gravity as A C o P C. For, if the gravity P o be reduced to the direction P C by draving vo perpendicular to CP, P o vill measure this central gravity. Now, it is well Eknown that Po x P C is every where =A C; and, in like manner, P.. x P C æ E C?2. Therefore Po, or P., are every where reciprocally as P C. Hence it ſollows that the sensible increment of gravity in proceeding from the equator to the pole is very nearly as the square oſ the sine of the latitude; for, without entering on a more curious investigation, it is plain that the increments of gravity, vhen s0 minute in comparison with the whole gravity, are very nearly as the decrements oſ the distance. Now, in a spheroid very little compressed, thes decrements are in that proportion. It may be demonstrated that in the latitude where sin.? , namely, Ilat. 859 1&, the gravity is the same as to a perſect sphere oſ the same capacity, having ſor its radius the semidiameter of iheellipse in that point. It is also a distinguishing property oſ this latitude that, if this semidiameter be produced, the gravitation of a particle, at any distance in this direction, is the same as to a perfect sphere of the same capacity. This is not the case in any other direction. 327. Cor. 3. Lastly, the force estimated in the direction P qd is to the ſorce in the direction Pę as E CX Pd to this is by no means the case. It can be strietly demonstrated that the denser fluids occupy the lowest place, and that the strata become less and less eecentric as we approach the centre, where the ultimate evanescent ſigure may be denominated a spherical pointt. It may be seen, even at present, that they cannot be similar, unless homogeneous. For, without this condition, it cannot be generally demonstrated that the gravitation of a particle  to the equator, and the axis, is as the distance from them, which is the foundation of all the subsequent demonstrations. S830. In the next place, all rectilineal columns, extending from the centre to the surſace, will balance in the centre. For, drawing uo, v o perpendicular to PC, it is plain that P o and ꝑ o represent the gravities of P and ꝑ estimated in the direction P C. Now Po: pd PC: ꝓ C. Thereſore the gravitation of the whole column, or the pressure on C, is represented by 2o55⸗ (B20.) Nov, in the ellipse Po  C æ CA, a constant quantity. Therefore the pressure of every column at C is the same. In like manner, the pressure oſ the columns C » and C u are equal, and therefore also the pressures of Pꝑ, Eæ, and Aa, at P, e, and a, are all equal. 831. Lastly, any particle of the fluid is equally pressed in every direction, and if the whole ere fluid, would be in equilibrio, and remain at rest. To prove this, let P»ꝓ (Fig. 40.) be a column reaching from P to the surface, and taken in any direction, hut, first, in one of the meridional planes, of which A B is the axis, and E Q the intersection by the equatorial plane. In the tangent Aò take Aa equal to E C, and A æ equal to A C. Drav a Ce and æ C to the tangent E. at the equator. It is evident that Ee  A C, and E. E C. Through» and P drav the lines p LI, NP æ, parallel to E C, and the lines 2 N9, IP: parallel to AB. Drav also I Kæ porallel to E C. F? .  — . cr LrLo.pocon And in like manner, ., L ro⸗o; But p OXOm: IOO  E C: A C, and therefore Fou K.L=EC: AC but X..L: KEIL=AC: EC and F dD: F,0 AC: EC, thereſore Fra D: KEIL=ECxAC: ACx EC, that is, in the ratio of equalit Now the area  & IL represents the weight of the column K L, or the pressure exerted in the direetion A C by the column IO. Thus it appears that when the forces acting on the particles in the column ꝓ P are estimated in the direction of the canal, the pressure exerted on the particle P is equal to the united pressures of the columns O P and I O acting in the direction A C, that is, to the pressure of the fluids in the canal IP in its own direction. Therefore the fluid in the canal IP vill balance the fluid in the canal 2 P, and the particle P will have no tendency to move in either direction. And, since this is equally true, whatever may he the direction of the canal Pꝓ, or P, it follows that the particle P is equally pressed in every direction in the plane of the figure, and would remain at rest, iſ the whole spheroid vere ſluid. But now let the canal P be in a plane diſferent ſrom a meridional plane (as in Fig. 41.) In whatever direction Pp is disposed, a plane may be made to pass through it, * The student must not eonfound this with a composition of two pressures or forces N P and O P, composing a pressure or force ꝑ P. There is no such composition in the present case. It ĩs only meant that the pressure in the direction ꝓ P arising from the gravitation of the particles in the canal, is the same, in respect of magnitude, with the pressure in the direction IP, arising from the gravitation oſ thæ fluid in IP. ; perpendicular to the plane E è Q q of the equator oſ the speroid. Let ꝓ Iqie be this plane. Its section with the spheroid will be an ellipse, similar to the generating ellipse AEB Q, as is well known. Let the meridional section AE B Q pass through the point P of the canal  P. It will cut the section e Ii in a line IP i perpendicular to its intersection e ꝗ with the equator of the spheroid, and therefore parallel to the axis a c b of the section, if it do not coincide with this axis Let CDE be the semidiameter of the generating ellipse which passes through the interseetion D of Ii and e q3 and drav P Z parallel to D C, and P æ parallel to e ꝗ cutting a c b in æ, and join æZ and c C. It is plain that the plane passing through the axis AB of the spheroid and the axis a b of the section è Iqi is perpendicular to that section (for it besects æ 5, vhich is a chord of the equatorial circle L æ Q ꝗ), and that the planes De C and PæZ are parallel, and the angles at c and æ right angles. Let us now consider the forees which act on the particles of fluid in the canal 2 P. They are, as beſore, all resolvable into two, one of them parallel to A C, and the other perpendicular to it. Thus, the particle. P is urged by a force in the direetion P D parallel io AC, and proportional to its distance P D from the equator of the spheroid. It is also urged by a ſorce in the direction P Z perpendicular to A C, and proportional to its distance P Z. This force P Z, may be resolved into Pæ and ? Z. The force æZ remains the same, for all the particles in the canal p P, æ Z being equal to c C. But the foree Pæ is always proportional to the distance of the particle in the canal  P from the axis c b of the section e Iqi. It is also to the axipetal force in the direction P Z as P æ to PZ. Moreover, it has been shewn (27.) that the force in the direction P Z is to the ſorce in the direction P D in the ratio of A C? x PZ to E C x P D, that is (on account of the similarity of the sections A E B Q and a e b ꝗ), as a x PZ to e} x P D. Therefore the force in the direction P: is to the force in the direction P D as a  x Pæ to e x PD. Wherefſore, since from these elements it has been proved already that the whole pressure on P in the canal ? P, lying in the plane AE B Q, is equal to the pressure of the canal IP, it follows that the pressure of the canal PP, lying in the plane a eb ꝗ is also equal to the pressure of the canal ITP. Thus ĩit now appears that the particle P is urged in every direction with the same force by the fluid in any rectilineal canal whatever reaching to the surface. It is therefore in equilibrio; and, as it is taken at random, in any part oſ the spheroid, the whole fluid spheroid is in equilibrio. We also see that the whole force with which any particle P is pressed in any direction whatever is to the pressure at the centre C as the rectangle IPiĩi to A CC. For that is the proportion of the pressure of the canal IP to that oſ the canal A C; and all canals terminating in the centre exert equal pressures. 832. It is now demonstrated that a mass of uniformly dense matter, influenced in every particle by gravitation, and so constituted that an equilibrium of force on every particle is necessary for the maintenanee of its form, may exist, with a motion of rotation, in the form of an elliptical spheroid, if there be a proper adjustment between the proportion of the two axes and the time of the rotation. Whatever may be the proportion of the axes of an oblate sphemid, there is a rapidity of rotation which will induce that proportion between the undimimished gravity at the pole and the diminished gravity on the surface of the equator, vhich is required for the preservation of that form. But it has not been proved that a fluid sphere, when set in motion round its axis, must assume the form of an elliptical spheroid, but only that this is a possible form. This was all that Newton aimed at, and his prooſ is not ſree ſfrom reasonable objectionss The great mathematicians since the days of Newton have done little more They have not de termined the figure that a fluid sphere, or a nucleus covered with a fluid, must assume vhen set in motion round its axis But they have added to the number of conditions that must be implemented, in order to produce another ind of assurance than an elliptical spheroid will answer the purpose, and by this limitation have greatly increased the diſficulty of the questionn. M. Clairaut, who has carried his scruples farther than the rest, requires, besides the three conditions which have been shewn to consist with the permanence oſ the elliptical form, that it also be demonstrated, Imo, That a canal of any form whatever must every where be in equilibrio: 2do, That a canal of any shape, reaching ſfrom one part of the surſace, through the mass, or along the surface, to any other part, shall exert no force at its extremities: Stio, That a canal of any form, returning into itself, shall be in equilibrio through its whole extent. 838. I apprehend that in the case of uniform density, all these conditions are involved in the proposition in art. (1) For wve can suppose the canal  P of Fig. 4l. to communicate with the canal P3. It has been shewn that they are in equilibrio in P. The canal 4 à may branch off ſrom P2 These are in equilibrio in the point 2 The canal S . may branch off at 8, and they will be still in equilibrio; and the canal 2 1 ill be in æquilibrio ith all the foregoing. Now these points of derivation may be multiplied, till the polygonal canal ꝓ P 4 32 I becomes a canal of œn tinual curvature of any ſorm. In the next place, this canl exeris no force at either end. For the equilibrium is provel m every slate of the canal 2 Pit may be as short as ve pleaseit may be evanescent, and actually cease to have mny length, without any interruption of the equilibrium. hereſore, there is no force exerted at its extremity to dib the ſorm of the surſace. It may be observed that this vVery circumstance proves that the direction of gravity is perpendicular o the surſface And it must be observed that the perpendicularity of gruvity to the surface is not employod in demonstrating this propositionn The whole rests on the propositions in art. 316, 817, and 818, both oſ vhich we ove to Mr MtLaurin. 334. Having now demonstrated the competency of the ælliptieal spheroid for the rotation of a planet, we proceæd to investigate the precise proportion of diameters which is required for any proposed rotationn. For example, What protuberancy of the equator will ũiffuse the ocean oſ this Earth uniſormly, consistently with a rotation in 23' 56 O4, the planet being uniſormly dense? Let ꝓ and e express the primitive gravity oſ a partiole Placed at the pole and at the surface of the equator, arising solely from the gravitation to every particle in the spheroid, and let c represent the eentrifugal tendency at the surſace of the equator, arising from the rotation. We shall have an elliptical spheroid oſ a permanent form, i? AC be to EC as e—c is to  (823.) We must thereſore find, ſirst of all, vhat is the proportion of ꝑ to æ resulting from any proportion of AC  EC. To accomplish this in general terms with precision, appeared so difficult a task, even to Newton, that he avoided it, and took an indireet method, which his sagacity shewed him to be perfecily safe; and even this was diſſicult. It is in the complete solution of this problem that the genius of M:Laurin has shewn itselſl most remarkable both for acuteness and ſor geometrical elegance It is not exceeded (in the opinion of ſhe first mathematicians) by any thing of Archimedes or Apolloniuss. For this reason, it is to be regretted that we have not room ſor the series of beautiful propositions that are necessary in his methodc. We must take a shorter course, limited indeed to spheroids oſ very small eceentricity (whereas the method oſ M Laurin extends to any degree oſ eecentricity), but with this limita- tion, perſectly exact, and abundantly easy and simple. It is, in its chief steps, the method folloed by M. Boscovich. 385. Let A EB Q (Fig. 42.) represent the terrestrial spheroid, nearly spherical, and let A e Bq and E a Qb represent the inscribed and circumseribed spheres With the axis and parameter AB describe the parabola AF G, drawing the ordinates BDF, E CH, &e. Describe also the curve line A IL G, such, that we have, in every point ofitb, AB:ADDF: DI; AB: ACCH: CL, &e. Our first aim shall be to find an expression and value of the polar gravity. We may conceive the spheroid as a sphere, on which there is spread the redundant matter contained between the spherical and the spheroidal surſaces. We know the gravitation of the polar particle A to the sphere, and now want to have the measure of its gravitation to this redundant matter. Suppose the figure to tum round the axis AB. The semiellipsis AE B will generate a spheroidal furface; the semicirele A e B will generate a spherical surſace, and the intercepted portions P , E æ, &e. of the ordinates will generate flat rings of the redundant matter. As the deviation ſrom a sphere is supposed very small (E e not exceeding the 500dth part of E Q,) we may suppose, without any sensible error, that Ap is the distance of A from the whole of the ring generated by P ꝑ. Proceeding on this assumption, we say that the gravitation of A to the rings generated by P ꝓ, Eeę, &e. is proportional to the portions F I, H L, &e. oſ the corespondiing ordinates DF, CH, &e., and that the gravitation of A to the whole redundant matter may be expressed by the surface AF H G L IA comprehended between the lines AF H G and ATLG. For, the absolute gravitation of A to the ring P ꝓ is direetly as the surface of the ring, and inversely as the square of its distance from AA Now, the surface oſ the ring is as its breadth, and its circumſerence jointly. Its breadth Pꝓ, and also its circumſerence, being propor- tional to Dꝑ, the surface is proportional to D 2. The absolute gravitation is thereſore proportional to This may be resolved into forces in the directions AD and D92. The force in the direction Dꝑ is balanced by an equal force on the other side of the axiss Thereſore, o have the gravitation in the direction of the axis, the value oſ the absolute gravitation in the direetion A» must be reduced in the proportion of Ap to AD. It D AD D x AD . thereſore beeome: RESD, V or, uhich Dæ x AD x A is the same thing, X2P. But Ap?ABX AD, and A ' /AB XAD. AlsoDpP / ADXDB. ADYDBXAD Ap, Thereſore the value last found becomes  EEE vhich is equal to, or the same thing vith D XAP Since A B is a constant quantity, the gravitation in the direction A C to the ring generated by P ꝓ is proportional o DB X Ap. It is very obvious that DF, CH, B G, &e. are respectively equal to A ꝓ, Ae, AB, &. Thereſore the gravitation 1o the matter in the ring generated by Pꝓ is proportional to DB X D F. Now, by the construetion of the curve line A L G, ve have AB: ADDF: DI thereforeoe AB: D BæDF: IF and ABXIF æDBXDF Therefore, since A B is constant, IF is proportional to DB X DF, that is, to the gravitation to the ring generated by P ). Therefore the gravitation to the whole redundant matter may be represented by the space A H G LA Let  be the periphery oſ a circle of which the radius is . The cireumſerence of that generated by E e vill be æ x C æ, and its surface ææ x C  x E ę, and the absolute gravitation to it is E E.æ au that is, 3] This, vhen reduced . -xEe x AC : to the direction A C becomes 2àcx Aõ that is, ?x Ee x Ee x Ae  ] 22 And because A ? /2A C3, and LH æ à CH, æ  Aę, the reduced gravitation beav x L H. This being the measure or representative of the gravitation to the material surface or ring generated by E æ, the gravitation to the whole redundant matter contained between the spheroid and the inseribed sphere will be represented by” 9 multiplied by the space comprehended between the curve lines A F G and A L G. We must find the value of this space. The parabolic space A H G B A is known to be =3ABXBG, æ3 AB. The square of DI is proportional to the cube of B D. For, by the construction of the curve AB: ADDVF: DI, and DI' / AD x D?AD DF A, ꝑ, ADP QDX5BrB  EB B 83857/7/]Eà1F Therefore D I is proportional to A Dj, and the area AB GLA is3 ABXBG, /3 AB. Take this from the paraholic area 3 A B?, and there remains 4, AB? for the value of A LGH A. This is equal to 33A C. Nov, the gravitation of A to the redundant matter was xEe : shewn to be/=m AL GH A Xx AC This now hecomes comes 15 A C x L& or ſs æ xX E e. Such is the gravitation of a particle in the pole oſ the spheroid to the redundant matter spread over the inscribed sphere. The gravitation of a particle situated on the surface of the equator to the same redundant matter is not quite s obvious as the polar gravity, but may be had with the same accuracy, by means of the ſollowing considerations. 836. Let A Ba b (Fig. 43.) represent an oblate spheroid, formed by rotation round the shorter axis B b oſ the generating ellipse, and viewed by an eye situated in the plane of its equator. Let A E a æ be the cireumseribed sphere. This spheroid is deficient ſrom the sphere by two meniscuses or cups, generated by the rotation of the lunulæ A E a BA and Ae a b A. Now, suppose the same generating ellipse A B a b A to turn round its longer axis A a. It will generate an oblong spheroid, touching the oblate spheroid in the whole circumference of one elliptical meridian, viz. the meridian A B a b A which passes through the poles A and a of this oblong spheroid. It touches the equator oſf the oblate spheroid only in the points A and a, and has the diameter Aa for its axis This oblong spheroid is otherwise wholly within the oblate spheroid, leaving between their surfaces two meniscuses oſ an oblong form This may be better conceived by first supposing, that both the sphervids and also the circumseribed sphere are cut by a plane P G ), perpendicular to the axis A a of the oblong spheroid, and to the plane of the equator of the oblate spheroid Now, suppose that the whole figure makes the quarter oſ a turn round the axis Bb of the oblate spheroid, so that the pole a oſ the oblong spheroid comes quite in front, and is at C, the eye of the spectator being in the axis produced. The equator of the oblong spheroid will now appear a circle O B o b O, touching the oblate spheroid in its poles B and b. The section of the plane P ꝓ with the circumseribed sphere will now appear as a circle I' R  r. Its section with the oblate spheroid ill appear an ellipse R G'r & similar to the generating ellip]se A B a b, as is well known And its section with the oblong spheroid will now appear a cirele IG'ig parallel to its equator O Bo b. Pꝓ is equal to P», and G⸗~ to G5. Thus it appears, that as every section of the oblate spheroid is deficient from the. concomitant section of the circumseribed sphere by the want of two lunulæ R P r G and Rp rę, so it exceeds the concomitant section of the oblong spheroid by two lunulæ G R ~I and Gr  i. It is also plain, that if these spheroids differ very little from perfect spheres, as when E B does not exceed 735 of Eæ, the deficiency oſ each section G  ſrom the concomitant section of the circumscribed sphere is very nearly equal to its excess above the concomitant section oſ the inscribed oblong spheroid. It may safely be considered as equal to one-half of the space contained between the circles on the diameters P ꝓ and G g, in the same way that we considered the lunula APEBep A of Fig. 42. as one-half oſ the space contained between the semicircles A e B and a E b. From this view oſ the figure, it appears, that the grvitation of a particle a in the equator of the oblate spheroid to the two cups or meniscuses R P r G' and R ” rę, by which the oblate spheroid is less than the circumseribed sphere, may be computed by the very same method that we employed in the last propositionn. But instead of computing (as in last proposition) the gravitation of a to the ring generated by the revolution of P G, Fig. 43.) that is, to the surſace contained between the two cireles RP ry and IGi g, ve must employ only the two lunulæ RP?P rG R and R »rg'R. In this way, ve may account the gravitation to the deficient matter (or the deficiency of gravitation) to be one-half oſ the quantity determined by * For the circumseribed circle is to the ellipse as the ellipse to the inscribed cirelee When the extremes differ so little, the geometrical and arithmetical mean will differ but insensibly. l that proposition, and therefore = 7 x E e of Fig. 42. The last proposition gave us the gravitation to all the matter by which the spheroid exceeded the inscribed sphere. The present proposition gives the gravitation to all the matter by which it ſalls short of the cireumseribed sphere. S3537. We can now ascertain the primitive gravitation at the pole and at the equator, by adding or subtracting the quantities now found to or from the gravitation to the spheres. Let 7 be the radius of the sphere, and æ r the circumſference of a great circlee The diameter is 2r. The area of a great circle is 4 and the whole surſace of the sphere is 2 æ7, and its solid contents is  æ. Therefore, since the gravitation to a sphere of uniform density is the same as if all its matter were collected in its centre, and is as the quantity oſ matter direetly, and as the square of the distance r inversely, the gravitation to a rs sphere will be proportional to ꝗ that is, to J ær.* Nov, let AE B Q (Fig. 42.) be an oblate spheroid, whose poles are A and B. The gravity oſ a particle A to the sphere whose radius is A C is  æ x AC, 3  x EC—3ꝗ x Eer à 7/x EC—1à 7-x Ee. Add to * I beg leave to mention here a circumstance which should have been taken notice of in art. 219, when the first principles of spherical attractions were established. It was shewn, that the gravitation of the particle P to the sperical surface, generated by the rotation of the arch AD'T, is equal to its gravitation to the surface generated by the rotation of B D T. Therefore, i P be infinitely near to A, 50 that the surſace generated by A D' T may be considered as a point or single partiele, the gravitation to that particle is equal to the gravitation to all the rest of the surface; that is, it is one- hal? of the whole gravitation. If we suppose P and A ſo coincide, that is, make P one of the particles of the surſace, its gravitation to the spherical surface will be only one- halſ of what it was when it was without the surface; and if we suppose P adjoining to A internally, it will exhibit no gravitation at all. Vou IſI Q S339. It now appears, as was ſormerly hinted, (822.) that we cannot have an elliptical spheroid oſ uniform density, in which the gravitation at the pole is to that at the equator as the equatorial radius to the polar radius This would make ꝓ: e=r: r2æ, a ratio five times greater than that which results from a gravitation proportional to x Thus have ve obtained, with suſficient accuracy, the ratio of polar and equatorial gravity, unaſfected by any external force; and we are nov in a condition to tell what velocity of rotation will so diminish the equatorial gravitation, that the remaining gravity there shall be to the polar gravity as AC to E C. 340. Let c be taken to represent the centrifugal tendency generated at the surſace oſ the equator by the rotation oſ the planet round its axis, and let the other symbols be retainedlc The sensible gravity at the equator is e:&, the polar gravity ꝓ, and the excess of the equatorial radius above the semiaxis 7 is æ. We have shewn, (837.) that the primitive gravities at the pole aud the equator are in the ratio of r to r} æ, or (because æ is in a very small part oſ 7) in the ratio of r + 2 æa tor. That is, r: r+}3 æce: p. This gives PmcH & Thereſore, the ratio of the sensible equatobetween CM and C E, has the same area with this section, and the gravitation to this circle will be the same (from a porticle placed in the axis) with the gravitation to this seetion. Thereſore, as the angle P CM is very nearly a right angle, the gravitation of  to the spheroid will be the same with its polar (or axicular) gravitation to another spheroid, whose polar semiaxis is P C, and whose equatorial radius is the mean proportional between CM and C E. This is easily computed. If the arch P E be 35 16, a sphere having the radius P C has the same capacity with the spheroid A E B Q (When Ee is very small). Hence follows what was said in the note on art. 397. ex , or 5 rial gravity to the gravity at the pole is ec: e + very nearly, e: e + 2 + c. Therefore we must have. for a revolving sphere oſ small eecentricity, . + ] eiræ +cr:r +x and  cr: x e e: 5r consequently, ex v +rc d ex 4 ex an ex Sor=rc x and 4 ex=D83re, and » mC 4 x5 . and the ellipticity : = that is, Four times the primitive gruvity at the equator is to sive times the centrifugal force of rolation as the semiaxis to the elevation of the equator above the inscribed sphere. 841. It is a matter of observation, that the diminution of equatorial gravity by the Earth's rotation in 23' 56 4 is nearly ,35. Therefore, 4 x 289: 5r: a/281 ;:, very nearly. This is the ratio deduced by Newton in his indirect and seemingly incurious method. That method has been much criticised by his scholars, as if it could be supposed, that Newton was ignorant that the proportionality employed by him, in a rough way, was not necessarily involved in the nature of the thing. But Newton knew that, in the present case, the error, if any, must be altogether insignificant. He did not demonstrate, but assumed as granted, that the form is elliptical, or that an elliptical form is competent to the purposee. His justness of thought has been so repeatedly verified, in many cases as abstruse as this, that it is unreasonable to ascribe it to conjecture, and it should rather, as by Dan. Bernoulli, be aseribed to his penetration and sagacity. He had so many new wonders lo communicate, that he had not time ſor all the lemmas that vere requisite for enabling inferior minds to trace his steps of investigation. 842. When considering the astronomical phenomena, some notice was tuken oſ the attempts which have been made to decide this matter by observation alone, by measuring degrees of the meridian in different latitudes. But such irregularity is to be seen among the measures of a degree, that the question is still undecided by this method. All that can be made evident by the comparison is, that the Earth is oblate, and much more oblate than the ellipse of Mr Hermann; and that the medium deduetion approaches much nearer to the Newtonian form. When we recllect, that the error of one second in the estimation oſ the latitude induces an error of more than thirty yards in the measure oſ the degree, and that the form of this globe is to be learned, not from the lengths of the degrees, but from the differences of those lengths, it must be clear, that unless the lengths, and the celestial are corresponding, can be ascertained with great precision indeed, our inference oſ the variation of curvature must be very vague and uncertainn. The perusal of any page oſ the daily observations in the observatory of Paris vill shew, that errors of 5 in declination are not uncommon, and errors oſ 2 are very ſrequent indeed. So many circumstances may also afſect the measure of the terrestrial are, that there is too much leſt to the judgment and choice of the ohserver, in drawing his conclusionss The history of the first measurement of the French meridian by Cassini and La Hire is a proof of thiss The degrees seemed to increase to the southwardthe observations were aſfirmed to be excellent —and for some time the Earth was held to be an oblong spheroid. Philosophy prevailed, and this vas allowed 1o be impossible;yet the observations were still held to be faultless, and the blame vas laid on the neglect oſ circum- stances which should have been considered. It was afterwards founũ, that the deduced measures did not agreæ vith some others of unquestionable authority, but would agree with them if the corrections were leſt out;they were left out, and the observations declared excellent, because agreeable to the doctrine oſ gravitation.* 848. The theory oſ universal gravitation affords another means of determining the form of the terraqueous globe directly from observation. Mr Stirling says, very justly, that the diminution of gravity, deducible from the remark of M. Richer, and confirmed by many similar observations, gives an incontestable proof, both of the rotation oſ the Earth, and of its oblate figure. It could not be an oblate figure, and have the ocean uniformly distributed, without turning round its axis; and it could not turn round its axis without inundating the equator, unless it have an oblate form, accompanied with diminished equatorial gravity. By the Newtonian theory, the increments of gravity as ve approach the poles are in the duplicate ratio oſ the sines of the latitudee The increments of the lergth of a seconds pendulum vill have the same proportion. Nothing can be ascertained by observation with greater accuracy than this For the London artists can make clocks which do not vary one second ſrom mean motion in three or four * They were reconcilel with the doctrine of gravitation, by attributing the enlargement of the southern degrees to the action of the Pyrenean mountains, and those in the south of France, upon the plummets. But it appears clearly, by the examination of these observations by Professor Celsius, that the observations were very incorrect, and some of them very injudiciously contrived (See Phil. Trans. No 457. and 386.) The palpable inaccuracies gave such latitude for adjustment, that it was easy for the ingenious Mr Mairan to combine them in such a manner as to deduee from them inferences in support of opinions altogether contradictory of those oſ the academy. Have we not a remarkable example of the doubtfulness of such measures, in the mensurement of the Lapland degree? It is found to he almost 200 fathoms too long. days We need not measure the change in the length of the pendulum, a very delicate tasbut the change oſ its rate of vibration by a change oſ place, which is easily done; and we can thus ascertain the force of gravity without an error oſ one part in 66400. This surpasses all that can be done in the measurement of an anglee Accordingly, the ellipticities deduced ſfrom the experiments with pendulums are vastly more consistent with each other, and it were to be wished that these experiments were more repeatedc. We have but very few of them. 344. Yet even these experiments are not without anomalies. Since, from the nature of the experiment, we cannot aseribe these to errors of observation, and the doctrine of universal gravitation is established on too broad a foundation o be called in question for these anomalies, philosophers think it more reasonable to attribute the anomalies to local irregularity in terrestrial gravity. If, in one place, the pendulum is above a great mass of solid and dense rock, perhaps abounding in metals, and, in another place, has below it a deep ocean, or a deep and extensive stratum of light sand or earth, we should certainly look ſor a retardation of the pendulum in the latter situation. The French academicians compared the vibrations of the same pendulum on the sea-shore in Peru, and near the top oſ a very loſty mountain, and they observed, that the retardation of its motion in the latter situation was not so great as the removal from the centre required, aceording to the Newtonian theory, viæ. in the proportion of the distance (the gravity being in the inverse duplicate proportion). * * The length of a pendulum vibrating seconds was found to be 439,21 French lines on the sea-shore at Lima; when reduced to time at Quito, 1466 fathoms higher, it was 438,88; and on Pichinka, elevated 2134 ſathoms, it was 438, 59. Had gravity diminished in the inverse duplicate ratio of the distances, the pendulum at Quito should have been 438,80, and at Pichinka it should have been 438,55. But it should not be so much retardedl. The pendulum was not raised aloft in the air, but was on the top of a great mountain, to which, as well as to the rest of the globe, its gravitation was directedlc Some observations were reported to have been made in Switzerland, which sheved a greater gravitation on the summit of a mountain than in the adjacent valleys; and much was built on this by the partizans oſ vortices. But, aſter due inquiry, the observations were ſfound to be altogether ſictitious. It may just be noticed here, that some of the anomalies in the experiments with pendulums may have proceeded from magnetism. The clocks employed on those occasions probably had gridiron pendulums, having five or seven iron rods, of no inconsiderable weightt. We know, for certain, that the lower end oſ such rods acquires a very distinet magnetism by mere upright positionn. This may be considerable enough, especially in the circumpolar regions, to affect the vibration, and it is therefore advisable to employ a pendulum having no iron in its composition. Although the deduetion of the ſorm of this globe, ſrom observations on the variations of gravity, is exposed to the same cause of error which aſfects the position of the plummet, occasioning errors in the measure of a degree, yet the errors in the variations of gravity are incomparably less. What would cause an error of a whole mile in the measure of a degree, will not produce the, à5 part of this error in the difference of gravity. 345. These observations naturally lead to other reſlectionss Newton's determination oſ the ſorm of the terraqueous globe, is really the form of a homogeneous and fluid or perfectly flexible spheroid. But vill this be the form of a globe, constituted as ours in all probability is, of beds or layers of different substances, vhose density probably increases as they are farther down? This is a very pertinent and momentous question. But this outline of mechanical philosophy will not admit of a discussion of the many cases which may reasonably be pro- posed for solution. All that can, with propriety, be attempted here, ĩs to give a general notion oſ the change of form that will be induced by a varying density. And even in this, our attention must be confined to some simple and probable easee We shall, thereſore, suppose the density iD increase as ve penetrate deeper, and this in such sort, that at any one depth the density is uniform. It is highly improbable that the internal constitution oſ this globe is altogether irregular. 346. We shall, therefore, suppose a sphere of solid matter, equally dense at equal distances from the centre, and covered with a less dense fluid; and we shall suppose that the whole has a ſorm suitable to the velocity of its rotation. It is this Torm that we are to find outt. With this view, let us suppose that all the matter, by which the solid globe or nuclens is denser than the fluid, is oollected in the centree We have seen that this will make no change in the gravitation of any particle oſ the incumbent fluidl. Thus, ve have a solid globe, covered with a fluid of the same density; and, besides the mutual gravitation of the particles of the fluid, we have a force oſ the same nature acting on every one oſ them, directed to the central redundant matterr. Now, let the globe liqueſy or dissolvee. This can induee no change oſ force on any particle of the fluid. Let us then determine the form of the now fluid spheroid, which ill maintain itself in rotation. This being determined, let the globe again become solidc. The remaining fluid will not change its form, because no change is indueæd on the force acting on any particle of the fluid. Call this hypothesis A. 347. In order to determine this state oſ equilibrium, or the ſorm which insures it, which is the chieſ difficulty, let us form another hypothesis B, differing from A only in this circumstance, that the matter collected in the centre, instead of attracting the particles of the incumbent fluid vith a force decreasing in the inverse duplicate ratio of their distances, attracts them with a ſorce increasing in the direct ratio oſ their distances, keeping the same intensity a the distance oſ the pole as in hypothesis A This fietitious hypothesis, similar to Hermann's, is chosen, because a mass so constituted vill maintain the ſorm of an accurate elliptical spheroid, by a proper adjustment of the proportion of its axis to the velocity oſ its rotationn. This will easily appear. For we have already seen that the mutual gravitation of the particles of the elliptical fluid spheroid produces, in each particle, a foree which may be resolved into two fſorces, one oſ them perpendicular to the axis, and proportional to the distance from it, and the other perpendicular to the equator, and proportional to the distancæ from its plane. There is now by hypothesis B superadded, on each particle, a ſorce proportional to its distance from the centre, and directed to the centre This may also be resolved into a ſoree perpendicular to the axis, and another perpendicular to the equator, and proportional to the distances from them. Therefore, the whole combined forces acting on each particle may be thus resolved into two forces in those directions and in those proportions. Therefore, a mass so constituted will maintain its elliptical form, provided that the velocity oſ its rotation be such that the whole forces at the pole and the equator are inversely as the axes of the generating ellipse We are to ascertain this form, or this required magnitude of the centriſugal force Having done this, we shall restore to the aceumulated central matter its natural gravitation, or its action on the fluid in the inverse duplicate ratio oſ the distances, and then see what change must he made on the form of the spheroid in order to restore the equililirium. 348. Let B Ab a (Fig- 44.) be the fietitious elliptical spheroid of hypothesis B. Let B Ebe he the inseribed sphere. Take E G, perpendicular to CE, ſo represent the force oſ gravitation oſf a particle in E to the central matter, corresponding to the distance CE or CB. Drav CG. Drav also A I perpendicular to CA, meeting CG in I. Describe the curve GL R, whose ordinates GE, LA, 5 vv /v &c. These ordinates will express the gravitations oſ the particles E, A.M, ue. to the central matter by hypothesis A. In hypothesis A, the gravitation of A ĩs represented by AL, but in hypothesis B it is represented by AI. For, in hypothesis B the gravitations to this matter are as the distances. E G is the gravitation of E in both hypotheses. Now, EG: AL=CA : CE, but EG: AICE: CAIn hypothesis A the weight of the column A is represented by the space AL G E, but by AIG E in hypothesis B. If, thereſore, the spheroid of hypotheses B was in equilibrio, while turning round its axis, the equilibrium is destroyed by merely changing the force acting on the column E A. There is a loss of pressure or weight sustained by the columm E A. This may be expresed by the space L G I, the difference between the two areas E GIA and EGL A But the equilibrium may be restored by adding a eolumn of fluid AM, whose weight ALRM shall be equal to LũG I, which is very nearly—/ LI æ In order to find the height of this column, produce G E on the other side oſ E, and make E F to E G as the density of the fluid to the density by which the nucleus exceęded it. E F will be to E G as the gravitation oſ a partiele in E to the globe (now oſ the same density with the fiuid) is to ĩts gravitation to the redundant matter collected in the centre. Nov, take D E to represent the gravitation of E to the fluid contained in the concentric spheroid E⸗ æ 5, vhich is somewhat less than its gravitation to the sphere E B  b. Draw CDN. Then AN represents the gravitation of A to the whole fluid spheroid, by see. 818. In like manner, N I is the united gravitation of A to both the fluid and the central matter, in the same hypothesis. RM, &e. are proportional to But in hypothesis A, this gravitation is represented by NL. : Let NO represent the centrifugal force affecting the particle A, taken in due proportion to N A or N L, its whole gravitation in hypothesis . Draw C K O. D X vill be the centrifugal force at E The space OK G I will express the whole sensible weight of the fluid in AE, acoording to hypothesis B, and OK G L will express the same, according to hypothesis AA L G Iis the diſference, to be compensated by means of a due addition AM. This addition may he defined by the quadrature oſ the spaces GE AL and GL I. But it will be abundantly exact to suppose that G L R sensibly coincides with æ straight line, and then to proceed in this mannerr. We have, by the nature of the curve GL R, AL: EGEC: AC Also AH, or EG: A IEC: AC Therefore AL: AIEC: AC Nov, vhen a line changes by a very small quantity, the variation of a line proportional to its cube is thrice as great as that of the line proportional to the roott. H I is the quantity proportional to EA the inerement of the root E C. ITL is proportional to the variation of the cube, and is therefore very nearly equal to thriee H I. Therefore sinee EG: HIZæEC: AE, we may state EG: LIæEC: SAE, or SEG: LImEC: AE. Nov, Q OL R may be considered as equal to QR x A M, or as equal to XG x AM, and LGI may be considered as equal to LIXJ AE, and 2KG AM æL IAE. Thereſore 2 XG: AELI: AM but EC: AE 8BEG: LI therefore 2L KGXEC: AE /3S EG: AM. . and 2 kG:  ; S EG: AM EC AE? and 2XG: SEGp35T AM That is, twice the sensible gravity at the equator is to thrice the gravitation to the central matter as a third proportional to radius and the elevation oſ the equator is to the addition necessary for producing the equilibrium required in hypothesis A. This addition may he more readily conceived by means of a construction. Make AE: Ec 2EG: 3 EG. Drav e a parallel to E A, and draw Ce m, cutting AN in m. Then a m is the addition that must be made to the column A C. A similar addition must be made to every diameter 2 CT, making 2 KG: 3 EG .a. : Tt, and the whole will be in equilibrio. 349. This determination of the ellipticity will equally suit those cases where the fluid is supposed denser than the solid nucleus, or where there is a central hollow. For E G may be taken negatively, as if a quantity oſ matter were placed in the centre acting with a repelling or centrifugal force on the fluid. This is represented on the other side of the axis B b. The space g i I in this case is negative, and indicates a diminution of the column a è, in order to restore the equilibrium. 350. It is evident that the figure resulting from this construction is not an accurate ellipse. For, in the ellipse, T t would be in a constant ratio to VT, whereas it is as VT? by our construction. But it is also evident, that in the cases oſ small deviation ſrom perfect sphericity, the change of figure from the accurate ellipse of hypothesis B is very small. The greatest deviation happens when E e is a maximum. It can never be sensibly greater in proportion to AE than j of A E is in proportion to E C, unless the centrifugal force F D he very great in comparison of the gravity D E. In the case oſ the Earth, where E A is nearly 135 oſ E C, if we suppose the mean density oſ the Earth to he five times that oſ sea water, am will not exceed n5æz oſ EC, or 54; of AE. 351. We are not to imagine that, since central matter requires an addition AM to the spheroid, a greater dexsity in the interior parts oſ this globe requires a greater equatorial protuberancy than if all vere homogeneous; for it is just the contrary. The spheroid to which the addition must be made is not the figure suited to a homogeneous mass, but a fictitious figure employed as a step o ſacilitate investigation. We must, therefore, define its ellipticity, that ve may know the shape resulting from the final adjustment. Let ſ be the density of the fluid, and n the density oſ the nucleus, and let n7 be q, so that ꝗ corresponds with E G of our constuction, and expresses the redundant central matter (or the central deficiency of matter, when the fluid is denser than the nucleus). Let BC or ECE be r, AE be æ, and let g2 be the mean gravity (primitive), and c the centriſugal force at A Lastly, let  be the circumſerence when the radius of the circle is I. The gravitation of B to the fluid spheroid is ; æſr 887), and its gravitation to the central matter is à æ The sum of these, or the whole gravitation of B, is j æ nr. This may be taken for the mean gravitation on every point of the spheroidal surſace. But the whole gravitation of B diſfers considerably from that of A. Imo, CA, or CE, is to } AE as the primitive gravity of B to the spheroid is to its excess above the gravitation (primitive) of A to the same, (887.) That is, r:  a/ sſr: ſ æſfæ, and 4 æſxæ expresses this excess. Qo, In hypothesis B, we have C E to CA as the gravitation of B or E to the central matter is to the gravitation of A to the same. Therefore CE is to EA as the gravitation of E to this matter is to the excess of A's gra- species, or ellipticity oſ the spheroid is b x n g 5n3Sſ Such then is the elliptical spheroid of hypothesis B; and ve saw that, in respect oſ form, it is scarcely distinguishable from the figure which the mass will have when the fietitious force of the central matter gives place to the natural force of the dense spherical nucleuss This is true ai least in all the cases where the centrifugal force is very small in comparison with the mean gravitation. We must thereſore take some notice oſ the influence which the variations of density may have on the ſorm of this spheroid. We may learn this by attending to the formula æ æ8, n . r3ãz 5n37 The value of this ſormula depends chieſly on the ſraction n 53F 852. If the density of the interior parts be immensely greater than that of the surrounding fluid, the value oſ this ſraction becomes nearly ;, and 4 becomes nearly and the ellipse nearly the same with what Hermann assigned to a homogeneous fluid spheroid. 5 If n=284; then 5n3r 5 and, in the case oſ the Earth, : would be nearly = ꝶ making an equatorial elevation of nearly 7 miles. 358. IF n /pft; the fraction 5757 becomes à, and 5 v E , which we have already shewn to be suitable to a homogeneous spheroid, with which this is equivalent. The l protuberance or ellipticity in this case is to that when the nucleus is incomparably denser than the fluid in the proportion of 5 to 2 This is the greatest ellipticity that can obtain when the fluid is not denser than the nucleus. Between these two extremes, all other values oſ the formula are competent to homogeneous. spheroids of gravitating ſluids, covering a spherical nucleus of greater density, either uniſormly dense, or eonsisting of concentrie spherical strata, each of which is uniſormly dense. From this view of the extreme cases, ve may infer in general, that as the incumbent fluid beeomes rarer in proportion to the nucleus, the ellipticity diminishes M. Bernoulli (Daniel), misled by a gratuitous assumption, says in his theory of the tides that the ellipticity produced in the aẽreal ſluid vhich surrounds this globe will be 800 times greater than that oſ the solid nueleus; but this is a mistake, which a juster assumption oſ data would have preventedc. The aẽreal spheroid will be sensibly less oblate than the nucleus. It was said that the value of the formula depended chieſn 5n2321 ly on the fraction But it depends also on the . 5c : :: . the fraction ꝗ increasing or diminishing as c increases or g diminishes, or as  diminishes or increases. It must also be remarked that the theorem 3 . ſor a homogeneous spheroid was deduced from the supposition that the eecentricity is very small (See sect. 335, 340.)0 When the rotation is very rapid, there is another form of an elliptieal spheroid, which is in that kind of equilibrium, which, if it be disturbed, will not be recovered, but the eccentricity will increase with great rapidity,till the whole dissipates in a round flat sheet. But within this limit there is a kind oſf stability in the equilibrium, by which it is recovered when it is disturbed. If the rotation be too rapid, the spheroid VoI. III. R becomes more oblate, and the ſluids which accumulate about the equator, having less velocity than that circle, retard the motion. This goes on however some time, till the true shape is overpassed, and then the accumulation relaxes. The motion is now too slow ſor this accumulation, and the waters flow back again toward the poless. Thus an oxilltion is produced by the disturbance, and this is gradually diminished by the mutual adhesion of the waters, and by ſriction, and things soon terminate in the resumption oſ the proper form. 354. When the density of the nucleus is less than that oſ the ſluid, the varieties which result in the ſorm from a variation in the density of the fluid are much greater, and more remarkablee Some of them are even paradoxical. Cases, for example, may be put, (hen the ratio of n to f differs but very little from that of 3 to 5), where a very small centrifugal force, or very slow rotation, shall produce a very great protuberance, and, on the contrary, a very rapid rotation may consist with an oblong form like an egęBut these are very singular cases, and of little use in the explanation of the phenomena actually exhibited in the solar system. The equilibrium which obtains in such cases may be called a ſottering equilibrium, which, when once disturbed, vill not be again recovered, but the dissipation of the fluid will immediately follo with accelerated speed. Some cases will be considered, on another occasion, where there is a deficiency of matter in the centre, or even a hollow. 365. The chief distinction between the cases of a nucleus covered with an equally dense fluid, and a dense nucleus covered with a rarer fluid, consists in the difference between the polar and equatorial gravities; for we see that the diſference in shape is inconsiderablee It has been shewn already that, in the homongeneous spheroid of small eccentricity, the excess oſ the polar gravity above the sensible PIGURE OF THE EARTH. 209 equatorial gravity is nearly equal to æ (for r: } æ: 9);: ſiud 5) When, in addition to this, we take into account the diminution c, produced by rotation, we have a  c for the whole diſference between the polar and the sensible equatorial gravity. But, in a homogeneous spheroid, we have x= cra Thereſore the excess of polar gravity in a homo5 geneous revolving spheroid is A + c or We may distinguish this excess in the homogeneous spheroid by the symbol E. 856. But, in hypothesis B, the equilibrium of rotation requires that 7 be t0æ as g to & and the excess of polar gravity in this hypothesis is & But we have also seen that 5e nſThereſore the ex- . . - E in this hypothesis, 7 x TEST, cess of polar gravity in this hypothesis is æ x E3r Let this excess be distinguished by the symbol .. 8357. The excess of polar gravity must be greater than this in hypothesis AA For, in that hypothesis the equatorial gravity to the ſluid part of the spheroid is already smalle. And this smaller gravity is not s0 much increased by the natural gravitation to the central matter, in the inverse duplicate ratio of the distance, as it as increased by the fictitious gravity to the same matter, in the direet ratio of the distances. The second oſ the three distinetions noticed in seet. 506. between the gravitations of B and A vas z This must now be changed into + 240 as and therefore C It is evident that the sum oſ A and B is x which is double of C, or Bæ, n87 is the arithmetical mean between them. Now e have seen that 7 x æ38 7 expresses the ratio of the excess oſ polar gravity to the mom  gavity in the safely be taken as the value of the ellipticity  he same hypothesis. It is not perfeetly exaet, but the deviation is altogether insensible in a case like that of the Earth, where the rotation and the eccentricity are 50 moderate..And, lastly, we have seen that the same fraction that expressẽ: the ratio of the excess of polar gravity to mean gravity, in a homogeneous spheroid, also expresses its ellipticity, and that twice this fraction is equal to the sum of the other two. hypothesis A. We have also seen that B 5 5 S59. Hence may be derived a beautiful theorem, first given by M. Clairaut, that the fruction epressing tuice the ellipticity of a homogeneous revolving spheroid is the sum of tuo fractions, one of which expresses the rotio of the excess of polar grovity to mean gravity, and the other expresses the ellipticity of uny spheroid of small eccentricity, which consists of a fluid covering a denser spherical nucleus. If, therefore, any other phenomena give us, in the ease of a revolving spheroid, the proportion of polar and equatorial gravities, e can find ĩts ellipticity, by subtracting the fraction expressing the ratio of the excess of polar gravity to the mean gravity from tvice the ellipticity of a ho- /6) PHYSICAL ASTBONOMY. mogeneons spheroid. Thus, in the case of the Earth, twice the ellipticity of the homogeneous spheroid is ,5. A medium of seven comparisons of the rate of pendulums gives the proportion of the excess o polar gravity above the mean gravity= ;35. If this fraction be subtracted from 7h3, it leaves 445 for the medium ellipticity of the Earth Of these seven experiments, five are scarcely different in the result. OF the other two, one gives an ellipticity not exceeding . The agreement, in general, is incomparably greater than in the forms deduced from the comparisons of degrees of the meridiann. All the comparisons that have been published concur in giving a considerably smaller eccentricity to the terraqueous spheroid than suits æ homogeneous mass, and which is usually called Newtons determination. It is indeed his determination, on the supposition of homogeneity; but he expressly says, that a different density in the interior parts will induce a diſferent form, and he points out some supposititious cases, not indeed very probable, where the form will be diſferent. Newton has not conceived this subject with his usual sagæcity, and has made some inferences that are certainly inconsistent with his law of gravitation. That the protuberancy of the terrestrial equator is certainly less than ,3; proves the interior parts to be of a greater mean density than the exterior, and even gives us some means for determining how much they exceed in 50 4n 8 f 2g5 bn35  1b5, às indicated by the experiments with pendulums, we can find the value of n. 360. The length of the seconds pendulum is the measure of the accelerating force of gravity. Thereſore, let I be this length at the equator, and I 4 d the lengih 5c 4n3f 9a at the pole We have 5 57237 t whence density. For, by making the fraction EEE 2æ . This equation, when properly treat: 6gd ed, give-ã i5ſta &e. &e.* The same principles may be applied to any other planet as well as to this Earth. Thus, we can tell what portion of the equatorial gravity of Jupitemis expended in keeping bodies on his surface, by comparing the time of his rotation with the period of one of his satellites. We fſind that the centrifugal force at his equator is &5 of the whole gravity, and ſrom the equation F-a = z, we should infer, that if Jupiter be a homogeneous fluid or ſlexible spheroid, his equatorial diameter vill exceed his polar axis nearly 10 parts in 118, which is not very different from what . we observe; so much, however, as to authorise us to conclude, that his density is greater near the centre than on his surface. These observations must suſfico as an account oſ this subjectt. Many circumstances of great eſſeot are omitted, that the consideration might be reduced to such simplicity as to be discussed without the aid of the higher geometry. The student vho wishes for more complete information must consult the elaborate perſormances of Euler, Clairaut, DAlembert, and La Placee The dissertation of Th. Simpson on the same subject is excellentt. The dissertation of F. Hoscovich will be of great service to those who are less versant in the fluxionary calculus, that author having every where endeavoured to reduce things o a * We have informntion very lately of the measurement of a degree, by Major Lamhton, in the Mysore in India, with excellent instruments. It lies in lat. 1° 32, and its length is 60494 British fathoms. We are also informed, by Mr Melanderhielm of the Swedish academy, that the measure oſ the degree in Lapland by Maupertuis is found to be 208 toises too great. This was suspected. geometrical constructionn. To these I would add the Cosmographia oſ Frisius, as a very masterly performancæ on this part of his subject. It were desirable that another element were added ſo the problem, by supposing the planet to consist of eoherent flexible matter. It is apprehenũed, that this would give it a form more applicableo the actual state of thingss If a planet consist of such matter, duetile like melted glass, the shape which rotation, combined with gravitation and this kind of cohesion, would induce, will be considerably different from what we have been considering, and susceptible oſ great variety, according to the thickness of the shell oſ vhich it is supposed to consist. The form of such a shell vill have the chie? influence on the form vhich ill be asumed by an ocean or atmosphere which may surround it. If the globe of Mars be as eccentric as the late observations. indicate it to be, ĩt is very probable that it is hollow, with no great thickness. For the centrifugal force must be exceedingly small. 861. The most singular example of this phenomenon that is exhibited in the solar system, is the vast arch or ring which surrounds the planet Saturn, and turns round its axis with most astonishing rapidity. It is above 200000 miles in diameter, and makes a complete rotation in ten hours and thirty-two minutes. A point on its surſace moves at the rate of 10004 miles in a minute, or nearly 17 miles in one beat of the clock, which is 58 times as sviſt as the Earth's equator. M. La Place has made the mechanism of this motion a subject of his examination, and has prosecuted it with great zeal and much ingenuity. He thinks that the permanent state oſ the ring, in its period of rotation, may be explained, on the supposition that its parts are without connexion, revolving round the planet like so many satellites, so that it may be considered as a vapour. It appears to me, ſhat this is not at all probablee He says, that the observed in- equalities in the circle of the ring are necessary for keeping ĩt from coalescing with the planet. Such inequalities seem incompatible with its ovn constitution, being inconsistent with the equilibrium of ſorcos among incoherent bodies. Besides, as he supposes no cohesion in it, any inequalities in the constitution of its different parts cannot influence the general motion of the whole in the manner he supposes, but merely by an inequality of gravitation. The effect of this, it is apprehended, would be to destroy the permanency oſ its construction, without securing, as he imagines, the steadiness of its position. But this seems to be the point which heis eager to establish; and he ſinds, in the numerous list of possibilities, conditions which bring things vithin his general equation ſor the equilibrium of revolving spheroids; but the equation is s0 very general, and the conditions are 50 many, and so implicated, that there is reason to fear, that, in some circumstances, the equilibrium is of that kind that has no stability, but, if disturbed in the smallest degree, is destroyed altogether, being like the equilibrium of a needle poised upright on its point. There is a stronger objection to M. La Place's explanation. He is certainly mistaken in thinking, that the period of the rotation of the ring is that which a satellite would have at the same distance The second Cassinian satellite revolves in 65 44, and its distance is 55,2 (the elongation in seconds). Now 6 4ãſ: T 56,9: 16,4. This is the distance at which a satellite would revolve in I0' 32. It must be somewhat less than this, on account of the oblate figure of the planet. Yet even this is less than the radius of the very inmost edge of the ringg The radius of the outer edge is not less than Q;, and that of its middle is 20. It is a much more probable supposition (for we can only suppose), that the ring consists of coherent matter. It has heen represented as supporting itslf like an arch; but this is less admissible than La Place's opinionn. The rapidity of rotation is such as would immediately scatter the arch, as ater is ſlirted about from a mop. The ring must ohere, and even cohere with considerable force, in order to counteract the centrifugal force, which considerably exceeds its weight. If this be admitted, and surely it is the most obvious and natural opinion, there will be no diſficulty arising from the velocity of rotation or the irregularity oſ its partss M. La Place might easily please his fancy by contriving a mechanism for its motionn. We may suppos that iĩt is a viscid substance like melted glass. Iſ matter of this constitution, covering the equator of a planet, turn round its axis too swiſtly, the viscid matter will be thrown off, retaining its velocity of rotation. It will therefore expand into a ring, and vill remove ſrom the planet, till the velocity of its equatorial motion correspond with its diameter and its curvature However small we suppose the chesive or viscid force, it will cause this ring to stop at a dimension smaller than the orbit of a planet moving with the same velocityThese seem to be legitimate consequences of vhat ve know of coherent matter, and they greatly resemble what we see in Saturn's ring. This constitution oſf the ring is also well fitted for admitting those irregularities which are indicated by the spots on the ring, and vhich M. La Place employs with so much ingenuity for keeping the ring in such a position, that the planet always occupies its centree This is a very curious circumstance, when considered attentively, and its importance is far from being obvious The planet and the ring are quite separat. The planet is moving in an orbit round the Sun. The ring accompanies the planet in all the irregularities of its motion, and has it always in the middle. This ingenious mathematician gives strong reasons for thinking, that if the ring were perfectly circular and uniform, although it is possihle to place Saturn exactly in its centre, yet the smallest disturbance by a satellite or passing comet would be the beginning oſ a derangement, which would rapidly increase, and, after a very short time, Saturn would be in contact with the inner edge of the ring, never more to separate from it. But if the ring is not uniform, but more massive on one side of the centre than on the other, then the planet and the ring may revolve round a common centre, very near, but not coinciding with the centre of the ring. He also maintains, that the oblate form of the planet is another circumstance absolutely necessary for the stahility of the ring. The redundaney of the equator, and ſlatness of the ring, fit these two bodies ſor acting on each other like tvo magnets, 50 as to adjust each other's motions. The whole oſ this analysis of the mechanism of Saturns ring is of the most intricate kind, and is carried on by the author by calculus alone, so as not to be instructive to any but very learned and expert analysts. Several points of 7t, however, might have been treated more familiarly. But, aſter all, it must rest entirely on the truth of the conJectures or assumptions made for procuring the possible application of the fundamental equations. 362. The Moon presents to the reflecting mind a phenomenon that is eurious and interesting. She always presents the same ſace to the Earth, and her appearance just now perſectly corresponds with the oldest accounts we have of the spots on her dis. These, indeed, are not oſ very ancient date, as they cannot be anterior to the telescope. But this is enough to shew that the Moon turns round her axis in precisely the same time that she revolves round the Earth. Such a precise coincidence is very remarkable, and naturally induces the mind to speculate about the cause oſ it. Newton ascribed it to an oblong oval figure, more dense, or at least heavier, at one end than at the other. This he thought might operate on the Moon somevhat in the way that gravity operates on a pendulum. He defines this figure in Proposition 38. B. IIL; and as the eccentricity, or any deviation of its centre of gravity m viates about 1 or 2 degrees from the perpendicular, and ĩt firmly retains this obliquity oſ position; and no observation can discover any deviation from perſect parallelism of the axis in all situations. It surely requires mueh less action of the direeting force to produce this change in the position of the axis, than to overcome even a very small difference in angular motion, because this last difference accumulates, and makes a great difference of longitude. These considerations seem to prove, that the eonstant appearance of one and the same part of the Moons surface has not been produced by the cause suspected by Newton. The coincidence has more probably been origina. We have no reason to doubt, that the same consummate skill that is maniſest in every part of the system, in which every thing has an accurate adjustment, pondere et mensurã, also made the primitive revolution rotation of the Moon that which ve now behold and admire The manifest subserviency to great and good purposes, in every thing that ve in some measure understand, leaves us no room to imagine that this adjustment of the lunar motions is not equally proper. 36:8. Philosophers have speculated about the nature of that body of ſaintly shining matter im which the S8un seems immerged, and is called the æodiacal light, beeause it lies in the zodiac. It is rarely perceptible n this elimate, yet may sometimes be seen in a clear night in February and March, appearing in the west, a little to the north of where the Sun set, like a beam of ſaint yelloish grey light, slanting toward the north, and extending, in a pointed or leaf shape, about eight or ten degrees. The appearance is clined to the plane of the lunar orbit B2 It is always situsted in the plane passing through the poles of the ecliptic and of the luna orbit. It therefore deviates about 13 from the axis of the ecliptie, and 7 from that of the Moons orbit. The descending node of the Moov's equator coincides with the ascending node of her orbit. evident that a permanent state is not acquired, till all tum round in the same time with the Sun's body. This circumstance limits the possible expansion of an atmosphere that does not cohere. It cannot exceed the orbit oſ a planet which would revolve round the Sun in that time. But the zodiacal light extends much farther. The discoveries of Dr Herschel on the surſace oſ the Sun, if confirmed by future observation, render this production oſ the zodiacal light inconceivable For motions and changes are observed there, which shew a perſect freedom, not constrained by the adhesion of any superior strat. This would give a constant westerly motion on the surface oſ the Sun. The diſficulty in accounting ſor this phenomenon is greatly increased by the ſact that vhen a comet passes through this atmosphere, the tail of the comet is not perceptibly aſfected by it. The comet of 1748 gave a very good opportunity of observing this It was not attended 10; but the descriptions that are given of the appearances oſ that comet shew clearly that the tail was (as usual) directed almost straight upward from the Sun, and thereſore it mixed with this vapour, or whatever it may be, vithout any mutual disturbance. It appears, thereſore, on the whole, that we are yet ignorant of the nature and mechanism of the zodiacal light. 864. Before concluding this subject, it is not improper to take some notice of an observation to which great importance has been attached by a certain class of philosopherss. We shall ſind it demonstrated in its proper place, that when the ſorce which impels a firm body ſorward, acts in a direction which passes through its centre of gravity, it merely impels it forvard. The body moves in that direction, and every particle moves alike, so that, during its progress, the body preserves the same attitude (so to speak). Taking any tranverse line of the body for a diameter, we express the circumstance by saying, that this diameter keeps parallel to itself, that is, all ĩts successve positions are parallel to its first positionn. But, when the moving force acts in a line which passes on one side of the centre oſ the body, the body not only advances in the direction of the force, but also changes its attitude, by turning round an axis. This is easily seen and understood n some simple cases. Thus, if a beam of timber, floating on water, be pushed or pulled in the middle, at right angles to ĩts length, it will move in that direction, keeping parallel to its first position. But, if it be pushed or pulled n the same direction, applying the foree to a point situated at the third of its length, that end is most affected (as we shall see fully demonstrated) and advances fastest, while the remote end is leſt a little behind. In this particular case, the initial motion of all the parts of the beam is the same as if the remote end were held fast for an instant. If the impulse has been nearer to one end than ; of the length, the remote end vill, in the fsirst instant, even move a little backward. We shall be able to state precisely the relation that will be observed between the progressive motion and the rotation, and to say how far the centre of the body vill proceed while it makes one turn round the axis. We shall demonstrate that this axis, round which the body turns, always passes through its centre of gravity in a certain determined direction. It very rarely happens that the direction of the impelling foree passes exactly through the centre of a body; and accordingly we very rarely observe a hody moving forvard in free space without rotationn. A stone thrown from the hand never doess A bomb-shell, or a cannon- bullet, has commonly a very rapid motion of rotation, which greatly deranges its intended direction. The Speculative philosophers, vho wish to explaii all the celestial motions mechanically, think that they explain the rotation of the planets, and all the phenomena depending on it, by saying, that one and the same force produced the revolution round the Sun, and the rotation round the axis; and produced those motions, because the direction of the primitive impulse did not pass precisely through the centre oſ the planet. They even shew, by calculation, the distance between the centre and the line of direetion of the impelling foreee Thus, they shew, that the point oſ impulsion on this Earth is distant from its centre ,3; oſ its diameter. Having thus accounted, as they imagine, for the Earths rotation, they say that this rotation causes the Earth to swell out all around the equator, and they assign the precise eccentricity that the spheroid must acquiree They then shew, that the action of the Sun and Moon on this equatorial protuberance deranges the rotation, so that the axis does not remain parallel to ĩtself, and produces the phenomenon called the precession of the equinoxess. And thus all is explained mechanically And on this explanation a conjecture is founded, which leads to very magnificent conceptions of the visible universee The Sun turns round an axiss. Analogy should lead us to aseribe this to the same causeto the action of a force vhose direction does not pass through his centree If so, the Sun has also a progressive motion through the boundless space, carrying all the planets and comets along with him, just as we observe Jupiter and Saturn carrying their satellites round their annual orbits. This is, for the most part, perfectly just. A planet turns round its axis and advances; and, therefore, the force which results ſrom the actual composition of all the forces which co-operated in producing both motions, does not pass through the centre of the planet, but precisely at the distance assigned by these gentlemen. But there is nothing of explanation in all thiss. From the manner in which the remark and iĩts application are made, we are misled in our conception oſ the ſact, and the imagination immediately suggests a single ſorce, such as we are accustomed to apply Vou. III. s in our operations, acting in one precise line, and, therefore, on one point of the body. It is this simplification of conception alone which gives the remark the appearance of explanation. A mathematician may thus give an explanation of a first-rate ship of war turning to windward, by shewing how a rope may be attached to the ship, and how this rope may be pulled, so as to make her describe the very line she moves in. But the seaman knows that this is no explanation, and that he produced this motion of the ship by various manœuvres oſ the sails and rudder. The only explanation that could be given, corresponding to the natural suggestion by this remark, would he the shewing some general ſact in the system, in which this single ſorce may be found that must thus impel the planets ecentrically, and thus urge them into revolution and rotation at once, as they would be urged by a stroke from some other planet or comet. With respect to this Earth, there is not the least appearance of the effect which must have been produced on it, had it been urged into motion by a single force applied to one point. The foree has been applied alike to every particle; there is no appearance of any such general foree competent to the production of such motions. Nay, did ve clearly perceive the existence of such a force, we should be as far from an explanation as ever. It is not enough that Jupiter receives an impulse which impresses both the progressive and rotative motion. His four satellites must receive, each separately, an impulse oſ a certain precise intensity, and in a certain precise direction, very different in each, and which cannot be deduced from any thing that we know of matter and motionn. No principle of general influence has been contrived by the zealous patrons oſ this system (for it is a system) that gives the smallest satisſaction even to themselves, and they are obliged to rest satisſied with expressing their hopes that it may yet be accomplished. hut Suppose that an expert mechanician should shew hovw the planets, satellites, and comets, may be so placed that an impulse may at once be given to them all, precisely competent to the production of the very motions that we observe, which motions vill now be maintained for ever by the universal operation of gravity, we should certainly admire his sagocity and his knowledge oſ naturee But ve still wonder as much as ever at the nice adjustment of all this to ends which have evidently all the excellence that order and symmetry can give, while many oſ them are indispensably subservient to purposes which we cannot help thinking good. The suggestion of purpose and final causes ĩs as strong as ever. It is no more eluded than it would be, should any man perfeetly explain the making of a vatch wheel, by shewing that it was the necessary result of the shape and hardness of the files and drills and chisels employed, and the intensity and direction of the ſorces by which those tools were moved; and having done all this, should say that he had accounted for the nice and suitable form of the wheel as part oſ a watch. And, with respect to the subsequent oblate form of the planet set in rotation, the mechanical explanation of this is incompatible with the supposition that the revolution and rotation are the eſſects oſ one simple ſorce. The oblate ſorm, if acquired by rotation, requires primitive fluidity, which is incompatible with the operation of one simple force as the primitive mover. There is no prooſ whatever that this Earth was originally fluid; it is not nearly so oblate as primitive fluidity requires; yet its form is so nicely adjusted to its rotation, that the thin film of water on it is distributed vith perfect uniformity. We are obliged to grant that a form has been originally given it suitable to its destination, and ve enjoy the advantages oſ this exquisite adjustment. I acknowledge that the influence oſ ſinal causes has heen ſrequently and egregiously misapplied, and that these ignorant and precipitate attempts to explain phenomena, or to account for them, and even sometimes o authenticate them, have certainly obstrueted the progress of true science. But what giſt of God has not been thus abused ? A true philosopher will never be s0 regardless of logic as to adduce final causes as arguments for the reality oſ any ſact; but neither will he have such a horror at the appearances of wisdom, as to shun looking at them. And we apprehend, that unless some  Frigidus obstetirit circum prœcordia sanguis, it is not in any man's power to hinder himself from perceiving and wondering at them. Surely  To look thro nature up to Naturè's God, cannot be an unpleasant task to a heart endowed with an ordinary share oſ sensibility; and the face oſ nature, expressing the Supreme Mind which gives animation to its features, is an object more pleasing than the mere vorkings of blind matter and motion. But enough of thisWe shall close this subject of planetary figures by slightly noticing, for the present, a consequence of the oblate form perceptible in all the plonets which turn round their axes; in the explanation of vwhich the penetration of Newton's intelleet is eminently conspicuous. 865. In sec. 339, and several ſollowing paragraphs, we explained the effects arising ſrom the inclination oſ the Moon's orbit round the Earth to the plane oſ the Earths orbit round the Sun. We saw, ſor example, that when the intersection oſ the two planes is in the line A B (Fig35.) of quadrature, the Moon is perpetually dravn out oſ that plane, and her path is continually bent down toward the ecliptie, during her moving along the semicirele ACB, and she deseribes another path A c b, crossing the ecliptic in b, nearer to A than B is. In the other half of her orbit, the same deviation is continued, and the Moon again crosses the ecliptic beſore she come to A, crosses her last qath near to c, and the ecliptic a third time at d, and s ſ on continually. Hence arises the retrograde motion of the nodes oſ the lunar orbitt. We shewed that this obtains, in a greater or less degree, in every position of the nodes, except when they are in the line of syzigy. What is true of one Moon would be true oſ any number: It would be true, were there a complete ring of moons surrounding the Earth, not adhering to one another. We saw that the inclination oſ the orbit is continually changing, being greatest when the nodes are in the line of the syzigies, and smallest when they are in quadrature. Now, if ve apply this to a ring of moons, we shall find that it will never be a ring that is all in one plane, except vwhen the nodes are in the syZzigies, and at all other times will be warped or out of shape. Now, let the moons all cohere, and the ring becomes stiff; and let this happen when its nodes are in syzigy. It will turn round without disturbance of this sortt. But this position of the nodes of the ring soon changes, by the Suns change oſ relative situation, and now all the derangements begin againn. The ring can no longer go out of shape or warn, because ve may suppose it inflexiblee But, as in the course of any one revolution of the Moon round the Earth, the inclination oſ the orbit would either be inereased, on the whole, or diminished, on the whole, and the nodes would, on the vhole, recede, this effect must be observed in the ring. When the nodes are so situated, that, in the course of one revolution oſf a single Moon, the inclination will be more increased in one part than it is diminished in another, the opposite actions on the different parts of a coherent and inflexible ring will destroy each other, as far as they are equal, and the excess only will be perceived on the whole ringg. Hence, ve can inſer, with great confidence, that from the time that the nodes of the ring are in syzigy to the time they are in quadrature, the inclination of the ring of moons vill be continually diminishing; will be least oſ all when the Sun is in quadrature with the line oſ the nodes; and will inerease to a maximum, when the Sun again gets into the line of the nodes, that is, when the nodes are in the line oſ the syzigies. But the inertia oſ the ring ill cause it to continue any motion that is accumulated in it till it be destroyed by contrary ſorces. Hence, the times oſ the maximum and minimum oſ inclination will be considerably diſferent from what is now stated. This will be attended to by and by. For the same reason, the nodes oſ the ring will continually recede; and this retrograde motion vill be most remarkable when the nodes are in quadrature, or the Sun in quadrature with the line of the nodes; and will gradually become less remarkable, as the nodes approach the line of the syzigies, where the retrograde motion ill the least possible, or rather ceases altogether. All these things may be distinetly perceived, by steadily considering the manner of acting of the disturbing ſorce. This steady contemplation, however, is necessary, as some of the effects are very unexpected. Suppose now that this ring contracts in its dimensions. The disturbing foree, and all its effects, must diminish in the same proportion as the diameter oſ the ring diminishes. But they ill continue the same in kind as beforee The inclination will increase till the Sun comes into the line of the nodęs, and diminish till he gets into quadrature vith them. Suppose the ring to eontract till almost in contact vith the Earth's surfacee The recess of the nodes, instead of being almost three degrees in a month, vill now be only three minutes, and the change of inclination in three months vill now be only about five seconds. Suppose the ring to contract still more, and to cohere vith the Earth. This will make a great change. The tendency of the ring to change its inclination, and to change its intersection with the eeliptic, still continuess But it cannot now produce the effeet, without dragging with iĩt the whole mass of the Earth. But the Earth is at perſect liberty in empty space, and being retained by nothing, yields to every impulse, and therefore yields to this action of the ring. Now, there is such a ring surrounding the Earth, having precisely this tendency. The Earth may be considered as a sphere, on which there is spread a quanũty of redundant matter vhich makes it spheroidal. The gravitation of this redundant matter to the Sun sustains all those disturbing forces which act on the inflexible ring of moons; and it will be proved, in its proper place, that the effect in changing the position of the globe is ; of what it would be, if all this redundant matter were accumulated on the equator. Tt will also appear, that the force by which every particle of it is urged to or from the plane of the ecliptic, is as its distance from that plane. Indeed, this appears already, because all the disturbing forces acting on the particles of this ring are similar, both in direction and proportion, to those which we shewed to influence the Moon in the similar situations of her monthly course round 1he Earth. Similar effects will therefore be produced. Let us now see vhat those effects will beeThe ſunar nodes continually recede; so will the nodes of this equatorial ring, that is, so will the nodes of the equator, or its intersection with the ecliptic. But the interseetions of the equator with the ecliptic are vhat we call the Equinoctia. Points. The plane of the Earths equator, being produced to the starry heavens, intersects that seemingly concave sphere in a great circle, which may be traced out among the stars, and marked on a celestial globee Did the Earths equator always keep the same position, this circle of the heavens would always pass through the same stars, and cut the ecliptic in the same two opposite points. When the Sun comes to one of those points, the Earth turning round under him, every point oſ its equator has him in the zenith in succession; and all the inhabitants of the Earth see him rise and set due east and est, and have the day and night of the same length. But in the course oſ a yeuar, the action of the Sun on the protuberance of our equator deranges it from its former position, in such a manner that each of its intersections with the ecliptic is a little to the westward oſ its former place in the ecliptic, so that the Sun comes o the intertction about 20 beſore he reaches the intersection of the preceding year. This anticipation of the equal division of day and night is therefore called the PRECESSION OP THE EQUINOXES. The axis of diurnal revolution is perpendicular to the plane of the equator, and must therefore change its position also. If the inclination of the equator to the ecliptic vere alvays the same (234 degrees), the pole of the diurnal revolution of the heavens (that is, the point of the heavens in vwhich the Earth's axis vould meet the concave) would keep at the same distance of 284 degrees from the pole of the ecliptie, and would thereſore always be found in the circumſerence oſ a circle, of which the pole of the eeliptic is the centree. The meridian which passes through the poles of the ecliptic and equator must alvays be perpendicular o the meridian which passes through the equinoctial points, and therefore, as these shiſt to the westward, the pole oſ the equator must also shiſt to the westward, on the circumference of the circle above-mentioned. But we have seen that the ring of redundant matter does not preserve the same inclination to the ecliptic. It is most inclined to it when the Sun is in the nodes, and smallest when he is in quadrature vith respeet to them. Therefore the obliquity of the equator and ecliptic should be greatest on the days of the equinoxes, and smallest vhen the Sun is in the solstitial pointss. The Earth's axis should twice in the year incline downward toward the ecliptie, and twice in the intervals, should raise itself up again to its greatest elevation. Something greatly resembling this series oſ motions may be observed in a childs humming top, when set a spinning an its pivo. An equatorial cirele may be drawn on this 10D, and a circular hole, a little bigger than the top, may be cut in a bit of stiff paper. When the top is spinning very steadily, let the paper be held so that half of the top is above it, the equator almost touching the sides of the holee When the whirling motion abates, the top begins to stagger a little Its equator no longer coincides with the rim of the hole in the paper, but intersects it in two opposite points. These intersections will be observed to shiſt round the whole cireumſerence of the hole, as the axis of the top veers round. The axis becomes continually more oblique, vithout any periods of recovering its ſormer position, and, in this respeet only the phenomena differ ſfrom those of the precession. It was afſirmed that the obliquity of the equator is greatest at the equinoxes, and smallest at the solstices. This would be the case, did the redundant ring instantly attain the position which makes an equilibrium of actionn. But this cannot be; chieſly for this reason, that it must drag along vith it the whole insceribed spheree During the motion ſrom the equinox to the next solstice, the Earth's equator has been urged toward the eeliptic, and it must approach it with an aceelerated motion. Suppose, at the instant of the solstice, all action of the Sun to cease; this motion of the terrestrial globe would not cease, but would gO On for ever, equably. But the Sun's action eontinuing, and now tending to raise the equator again from the ecliptie, it cheeks the contrary motion of the globe, and, at length, annihilates it altogether; and then the effect of the elevating force begins to appear, and the equator rises again from the ecliptico When the Sun is in the equinox, the elevation of the equator should be greatest; but as it arrived at this position with an accelerated motion, it continues to rise (with a retarded motion) till the continuance of the Sun's depressing force puts an end to this rising; and now the efſect of the depressing ſorce begins to appear. For these reasons, it happens that the greatest obliquity of the equator to the ecliptic is not on the days oſf the equinoxes, but about six weeks aſter, viz. about the first of May and November; and the smallest obliquity is not at midsummer and midvinter, but about the beginning of February and of August. And thus, ve find that the same principle of universal gravitation, which produces the elliptical motion oſ the planets, the inequalities of their satellites, and determines the shape oſ such as turn round their axis, also explains this most remarkable motion, vhich had bafſled all the attempts of philosophers to account foa motion which seemed to the ancients to affect the whole host of heaven; and when Copernicus shewed that it was only an appearance in the heavens, and proceeded from a real small motion of the Earth's axis, it gave him more trouble to conceive this motion with distinctness, than all the others. All these thing/obvia conspicimus nubem pellenti mathesi. 366. Such is the method which Sir Isaac Newton, the sagacious discoverer oſ this mechanism, has taken to give us a notion of it. Nothing can be more clear and familiar in genera. He has even subjected his explanation to the svore task oſ calculationn. The forces are known, both in quantity and direction. Thereſore the effects must be such as legitimately flow from those forces. When we consider vwhat a minute portion of the globe is acted upon, and hov much inert matter is to be movẽd by the force which affects 50 small a portion, ve must expect very feeble effects. All the change that the action oſ the Sun produces on the inclination of the equator amounts only to the fraction of a second, and is thereſore quite insensiblee The change in the position of the equinoxes is more conspicuous, because it accumulates, amounting to about ꝗ annually, by Nevton's calculationn. We shall take notice oſ this calculation at another time, and at present shall only observe that this motion of the equinox is but a small part of the precession nctually observed. This is about 505 annually. It would therefore seem that the theory and observation do not agree, and that the precession oſ the equinoxes is by no means explained by it. S67. It must be remarked that we have only given an account of the eſfect resulting from the unequal gravitation of the terrestrial matter to the Sun. But it gravitates also to the Moon. Moreover, the inequality oſ this gravitation (on which inequality the disturbance depends) is vastly greater. The Moon heing almost 00 times nearer than the Sun, the gravitation to a pound oſ lunar matter is almost 640,000,000 times greater than to as much solar matterr. When the calculation is made from proper data, (in which Newton was considerably mistaken) the eſfect oſ the Iunar action must very considerably exceed that of the Sun. He was mistaken, in respect to the quantity of matter in the Sun and in the Moon. The transit oſ Venus, and the observations vhich have been made on the tides, have brought us much nearer the truth in both these respects. Whohen the calculation is made on such assumptions oſ the matter in the Sun and Moon as are best supported by observation, we find that the annual precession occasioned by the Suns action on the equatorial protuberance is about 14 or 15, and that produced by the Moon is about 85. The precession really observed is about 507, and the agreement is abundantly exact. It must be ſarther remarked, that this agreement is no longer inferred from a due proportioning of the whole observed precession between the Sun and the Moon, as ve were ſormerly obliged to do; but each share is an independent thing, caleulated without any reference to the whole precession. It is thus only that the phenomenon may be aſfirmed to be truly explained. 368. For this demonstration we are indebted to Dr Bradley. His discovery of what is now called the NuTaTION of the Earth's axis, gave us a precise measure of the lunar action which removed every doubt. It therefſore must be considered here. The action oſ the luminaries on the Earth's equator, by which the position of it is deranged, depends on the magnitude of the angle which the equator makes with the line joining the Earth vith the disturbing body. The Sun i never more than 28 degrees ſrom the equator. But when the Moons ascending node is in the vernal equinox, she may deviate nearly 29 degrees from it. And when the node is in the autumnal equinox, she cannot go more than 17 degrees from it. Thus, the action of the sun is, from year to year, the same. But as, in 19 years, the Moons nodes take all situations, the action of the Moon is very variable It was one of the effects of this variation that Bradley discovered. While the Earth's equator continued to open farther and farther from the line joining the Earth with the Moon, the axis of the Earth was gradually depressed towards the ecliptiec, and the diminution of its inclination at last amounted to I8 secondss. Dr Bradley saw this by its increasing the declination of a star properly situatedc Aſter nine years, vhen the Moon was in such a situation that she never went more than 17 from the Earth's equator, the same star had I8 less declination. 369. This change in the inclination of the Earth's equator is accompanied with a change in the precession of the equinoxes. This must increase as the equator is more open when viewed ſrom the Moon. In the year in which the lunar aseending node is in the vicinity oſ the vernal equinox, the precession is more than 58'; and it is but 43 when the node is near the autumnal equinox. These are very conspicuous changes, and oſ easy observation, although long unnoticed, while blended with other anomalies equally unknown. Few discoveries in astronomy have been of more service to the science than this oſ the nutation, and that oſ aberration, both by Dr Bradley. For till they were known, there was an anomaly, vhich might sometimes amount to 58 (the sum oſ nutation and aberration), and aſfected every motion and every observation. No theory of any planet could be freed from this uncertainty. But now, we can give to every phenomenon its own proper motions, with all the accuracy that modern instruments can attain Without these two discoveries, we could not have brought the solution of the great nautical problem oſ the longitude to any degree oſ perſection, because we could not render either the solar or lunar tables perfect. The changes in the position of the Earths axis by nutation, and the concomitant equation of the precession, by recurring in the most regular manner, have given us the most exact measure oſ the changes in the Moons action: and therefore gave an incontrovertible measure of her whole action, because the proportion between the variation and the whole action was distinctly known. This not only completes the practical solution of the problem, but gives the most unquestionable proof of the soundness of the theory, shewing that the oblate form of the Earth is the cause oſ this nutation oſ its axis, and establishing the universal and mutual attraction of all matter. It shews with what confidence we may proceed, in ſollowing this law of gravitation into all its consequences, and ſhat ve may predict, without any chance oſ mistake, what will be the effect of any combination of circumstances that can be mentioned. And it surely shews, in the most conspicuous manner, the penetration and sagacity oſ Newton, who gave encouragement to a surmise so singular and so unlike all the usual questions of progressive motion, even in all their varieties. Yet this most recondite and delicate speculation was one of his early thoughts, and is one of the twelve propositions which he read to the Royal Society. 70. ITt must be acknowledged, however, that this manner of exhibiting the theory of the precession of the equinoxes is not complete, or even aceurate in the selection of the physical circumstances on which the prooſ proceeds It is merely a popular vay of leading the mind to the view oſ actions, vhich are indeed oſ the same kind with those actually concurring in the production of the eſfeet. But it is not a narration of the real actionss Nor are the effects of those that are employed estimated according to their real manner of acting. The whole is rather a shrewd guess, in vwhich Newton's great penetration enabled him to eateh at a very remote analogy between the libration oſ the Moon and the wavering motion of the Earth's axiss We are not in a condition, in this part oſ the course, to treat this question in the proper manner. We must first understand the properties of the lever as a mechanical power, and the operation of the connecting forces of firm or rigid bodiess What we have said vill suffice however for giving a distinet enough conception of the general effects of the action oſ remote bodies on a spheroidal planet turning round its axis.* It is scarcely necessary to add that the other planets cannot sensibly influence the motion of the Earth's axis. Their accumulated action may add about  of a second to the annual precession of the equinoxes. The planets Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, being vastly more oblate than the Earth, must be more exposed to this derangement of the rotative motion. Jupiter and Saturn, having :0 many satellites, hich take various positions round the planet, the problem hecomes immensely complicated. But the small inclination oſ the equator, and the * To those who wish to study this very curious and difficult problem, I should recommend the solution given by Frisius in the second purt of his Cosmographia, as the most perspicuous of any that I am acquainted with. The elaborate performance of Mr Walmesley, Euler, D Alembert, and La Grange, are accessible only to expert analysts. The essay by T. Simpson, in the Philosophical Transactions, vol. 50, ſ: 416, is remarkable for its simplicity, but, by employing the symbolical or algebraic analysis, the student is not s0 much aided by the constant accompaniment of physical ideas, as in the geometrical method of Frisius. great mass of the planet, and its very rapid rotation, must greatly diminish the effeet we are now considering Mars, being small, turning slowly, and yet being very oblate, must sustain a greater degree of this derangement; and if Mars had a satellite, ve might expect such a change in the position of his axis as should become very sensible, even at this distance. The ring oſ Saturn must he subject to similar disturbances, and must have a retrogradation of its intersection vwith the plane of the orbit. Had ve nothing to consider but the ring itself, it would be a very easy problem to determine the motion of its nodes. But the proximity, and the oblate form, of the planet, and, above all, the complicated action of the satellites, make jt next to unmanageable. It has not been attempted,  § know of. It may think) be deduced, from the Greenwich observations since 1750, that the nodes retreat on the orbit of Saturn about 84 or 36 in a century, and that their longitude in 1801 vas 5 17° 18 and II' 17°13. This may be received as more exact than the determination given in art. 142. I said, in art. 182, that we have seen too little of the motions of Ceres and Pallas to announce the elements of their theories with any thing like precisionn. But, that they may not be altogether omitted, the following may be received as of most authority: Ceres. Pallas Juno. L Vesta. Mean distance, 2L767231 L~-ILS 2.660 2.3632 Eccentri. to m. d. . 0.078 0.2447 0.954 O. 1838 Lon. perih. in 1818, 4.227.18 4.1.8 19932956 8510019'36 Period (sider.), days, 1682.25 170316 1880 1161 Mean lon. Jan. I818, 1009651' 9°2958 3' 2r 4a5 6' 24 45 43 Inelin. orbit, 10°3. 2™“37 13°83' 387 rs Lon. node in 1818, 2 0° 4 5.22.21 5%l?ò 500 31531:04l' These bodies present some very singular circumstances to our study; their distances and periods being almost the * In IBIO. 6 same, and their longitudes at present differing very little. They diſfer considerably in eccentricity, the place oſ the node, and the inclination oſ their orbits They must be greatly disturbed by each other, and by Jupiter. With these observations I might conclude the discussion of the mechanism of the solar system. The facts observed in the appearances of the comets are too few to authorise me to add any thing to what has been already said concerning them. I refer to Newtons Principia for an account of that great philosopher's conjectures concerning the luminous train which generally attends them, acknowledging that I do not think these conject ures well supported by the established laws of motionn. Dr Winthorp has given, in the 57th volume of the Phil, Trans. a geometrical explanation of the mechanism of this phenomenon that is ingenious and elegant, but founded on a hypothesis which I think inadmissible. . 871. No notice has yet been taken of the relations of the solar system to the rest of the visible host of heaven; and we have, hitherto, only considered the starry heavens as affording us a number of fixed points, by which we may estimate the motions oſ the hodies which compose our system. It will not, therefore, be unacceptable should I now lay hefore the reader some reſlections, which naturally arise in the mind of any person who has been much oceupied in the preceding researches and speculations, and which lead the thoughts into a scene of contemplation far exceeding in magnificence any thing yet laid before the reader. As they are of a miscellaneous nature, and not susceptible of much arrangement, I shall not pretend to mark them by any distinctions, but shall take them as they naturally offer themselves. The fitness for almost eternal duration, so conspicuous in the constitution of the solar system, cannot but suggest the highest ideas of the intelligence of the Great Artist. No doubt these conceptions will be very obseure, and very madequate; but ve shall find, that the farther we advance in our knowledge of the phenomena, we shall see the more to admire, and the more numerous displays of great wisdom, power, and kind intentions. It is not thereſore fearſul superstition, but the cheerſul anticipation of a good heart, which will make a student of nature even endeavour to form to himself still higher notions of the attributes of the Divine Mind. He cannot do this in a direct manner. All he can do is to abstract all notions of imperſeetion, whether in pover, skill, or benevolent intentions, and he vill suppose the Author of the universe to be infinitely powerful, wise, and good. It is impossible to stop the ſlights of a speculative mind, warmed by such pleasing notionss. Such a mind vill form to ĩtself notions of what is most excellent in the designs which a perfect being may form, and it finds itselſ under a sort of necessity of believing that the Divine Mind will really form such designss. This romantic wandering has given rise to many strange theological opinions. Not doubting (at least in the moment of enthusiasm) that ve can judge of what is most excellent, we take it for granted that this creature of our heated imagination must also appear most excellent to the Supreme Mind. From this principle, theologians have ventured to lay down the laws by which God himself must regulate his actions. No wonder that, on o fanciful a foundation as our capacity to judge of vhat is most excellent, have been erected the most extravagant ſabrics; and that, in the exuberance of religious æeal, the Author oſ all has been deseribed as the most limited Agent in the universe, forced, in every action, to regulate him:elf by our poor and imperfeet notions of what is excellent. We, who vanish from the sight, at the distance of a neighbouring hillvwhose greatest works are invisible from the Moon whose whole habitation is not visible to a spectator in Saturnshall such creatures pretend to judge oſ what is supremely excellent? VoL. III T Let us not pretend even to guess at the specific laws by which the conduet of the Divinity must be directed, except in 50 ſar as it has pleased him to declare them to us We shall pursue the only safe road in this speculation, if we endeavour to discover the laws by which his visible and comprehensible works are actually conducted. The more we discover oſ these, the more do ve find to fill us with admiration and astonishment. The only speculations in which ve can indulge, without the continual danger of going astray, are those which enlarge our notions of the scœne on vhich it has pleased the Almighty to display his perſetionss. This will be the undoubted effect of enlarging the field of our own observationn. After examining this lower vorld, and observing the nice and infinitely various adjustments of means to ends here below, ve may extend our observation beyond this globee. Then shall we find that, as ſar as our knovledge can carry us, there is the same art, and the same production of good effects by beautifully contrived means. We have lately discovered a new planet, ſar removed beyond the formerly imagined bounds of the planetary world. This discovery shews us, that if there are thousands more, they may be for ever hid from our eyes by their immense distance Yet there we find the same eare taken that their condition shall be permanent. They are influenced by a force directed to the Sun, and inversely as the square of the distance from him; and they describe ellipses. This planet is also accompanied by satellites, doubtless rendering to the primary and its inhabitants services similar to what this Earth receives from the Moon. All the comets of whose motions we have any precise knowledge, are equally seeured; none seems to deseribe a parabola or hyperbola, so as to quit the Sun ſor ever. This mark of an intention that this noble ſabrie shall continue for ever to declare itselſ the work of an Almighty and Kind Hand, naturally carries forvard the mind into that unbounded space, oſ which our solar system occupies so in- considerable a portionn. The mind revolis at the thought that this is studded with stars for no other purpose than to assist the astronomer in his computations, and to furnish a gay spectacle to the unthinking multitudee We see nothing here below, or in our system, which answers but one solitary purpose; and we require that a positive reason shall be given for limiting the Host of Heaven to s ignoble an office. As such has not been given, we indulge ourselves in the pleasing thought that the stars make a part of the universe, no less important in purpose than great in extent. We are justiſiable, by vhat we in some measure understand in supposing each star a sun, the centre of a planetary sys tem, full of enjoyment like our own, and so constructed as to last for ever. When the philosopher indulges himselſ in those ama⸗ing, but pleasing thoughts, he must regulate his speculations by analogies and resemblances to things more familiarly known to himm We must suppose those systems to resemble our own, and that they are kept together by a gravitation in the inverse duplicate ratio oſ the distances. For we knov that this alone will insure permanency and good order. But in o doing, ve extend the influence oſ gravity to distances inconceivably greater than any that we have yet considered; and we come at last to believe that gravitation is the bond of connection which unites the most distant bodies of the visible universe, rendering the whole one great machine, for ever operating the most magnificent purposes, vorthy oſ its All-perfect Creatorr. And, when we see that such a connexion is necessary for this end, ve are apt to imagine that gravity is essential  or indispensable in that matter that is to be moulded into a world. But let not our ignorance mislead us, nor let us measure every thing by that small scale which God has enabled us to use, unless we can see some cireumstances of resemblance in the appearances, which may justify the application. * A frame of material nature of any kind cannot be conceived by the mind, without supposing that the matter of vhich it consists is influenced by some active powers, constituting the relations between its different parts. Were there only the mere inert materials of a world, it would hardly be better than a chaos, although moulded into symmetrical forms, unless the spirit of its author were. to animate those dend masses, s0 as to bring ſorth change, and order, and beauty. Our illustrious Newton thereſore says, vith great propriety, that the business of a true philosophy is to investigate those active powers, by which the course of natural events, to a very great extent at least, is perpetually governed. Philosophising with this view, he diseovered the law of universal gravitation, and has thus given the brightest specimen of the powers of human understanding. The notion of something like gravity seems inseparable from our conception of any established order of things; for unless some principle of general union obtain among the parts of matter, ve can have no conception of the very ſirst formation of the individuals of which a world may he composed. But general gravitation, or that power by which the di⸗tant bodies belonging to any system are connected, and act on one another, does not seem so indispensably necessary * For many oſ the thoughts in what follows, the reader is indebted to a very ingenious pamphlet, published by Cadell and Davies in 1777, entitled, Thoughts on Generul Grovitaution. It is much to be regretted that the author has not availed himself of the successful researches of astronomers since that time, and prosecuted his excellent hints. If it be the performence of the person whom I suppose to be the author, I have such an opinion of his acuteness, and of his justness of thought, that I take this opportunity of requesting him to turn his attention aſresh to the subjeet. His advantages, from his present situation and connexions, are precious, und should not be lost. to the very being of the system, as particular gravity is to the being oſ any individual in itt. We cannot discern any absurdity in the supposition of bodies, such as the planets, s0 situated with respect to another great hody, sueh as the Sun, as to receive from it suitable degrees of light and heat, without their having any tendency to approach the Sun, or each other. But then, how ſar such limitation oſ gravity may be a possible thing, or how ſar its indefinite extension in every direction may be involved in its very nature, we cannot tell, until we are able to consider gravity as an effect, and to deduee the laws of its operation ſrom our knovledge oſ its cause. That the influence of gravity extends into the boundless void, to the greatest assignable distance, seems to be almost the hinge of the Newtonian philosophy. At least there is nothing that warrants any limit to its action. Father Boscovich, indeed, shews that all the phenomena may be what they are, without this as a necessary consequence But he is plainly induced to bring forward the limitation in order to avoid what has been thought a necessary consequence of the indeſinite extension of gravity; and what he offers is a mere possibility. Nov, iſ such extension oſ gravitation be inseparable, in ſact, from its nature, then, if all the bodies of our system are at rest in absolute space, no sooner does the influence of general gravitation go abroad into the system, than all the planets and comets must begin to approach the Sun; and in a very small number of days, the whole oſ the solar system must fall into the Sun, and be destroyed. But, that this ſair order may be preserved, and accommodated to this extended influence of gravity, which appears s0 essential to the constitution of the several parts oſ the system, we see a most simple and eſfectual prevention, by the introduction of projectile forces and progressive motion. For upon these being now combined, and properly adjusted vith the variation of gravity, the planets are made to re- volve round the Sun in stated courses, by whieh their continual approach to the Sun and to one another is prevented, and the adjustment is made with such exquisite propriety, that the perfect order of things is almost unchangeablee. This adjustment is no less maniſest in the subordinate systems of a primary planet and its satellites, which are not only regulated by their own orbital motions, but are the constant attendants of their primaries in their revolution round the Sun. In this view oſ the subject, ſforasmuch as gravity seems essential to the constitution of all the great bodies of the system, and in so far as its indefinite extension may be inseparable from ĩts nature, it appears that periodical motion must be necessary ſor the permanency and order oſ every system of worlds whatever. But here a thought is suggested, which obviously leads to a new and a very grand conception of the universe If periodical motion be thus necessary for the preservation of a small assemblage of bodies, and iſ Newton's law present to us the whole host of heaven as one great assemblage nſfected by gravitation, ve must still have recourse to periodical motion, in order to secure the establishment of this grand universal system. For iſ there hbe no bounds to the influence oſ gravitation, and if all the stars be so many suns, the centres oſ as many systems (as is most reasonable to believe) the immensity of their distance cannot satisſy us for their being able to remain in any settled order. Those that are situated towards the confines of this magniſicent creation must forsake their stations, and, with an approach, continually accelerated, must move onwards to the centre of general gravitation, and, aſter a series of ages, the whole glory of nature must end in a universal vreck. As the system of Jupiter and his satellites is but an epitome of the great solar system to which he belongs, may not this, in ĩts turn, be a faint representation of that grand system of the universe, round whose centre this Sun, with his attending planets, and an inconceivable multitude of like systems, do in reality revolve according to the law of gravitation? Now, vill our anticipation of disorder and ruin be changed into the contemplation of a countless number of nicely-adjusted motions, all proclaiming the sustaining hand of God. This is indeed a grand, and almost overpowering thought; yet justified both by reason and analogy. The grandeur, however, of this universal system only opens upon us by degrees. Iſ it resemble our solar system in construction, what an inconceivable display of ereation is suggested, when we turn our thoughts towards that place which the motions of so many revolving systems are made to respect? Here may be an unthought-of universe oſ ĩiself, an example oſ material creation, vhich must individually exceed all the other parts, though added into one amount. As our Sun is almost four thousand times bigger than all his attendants put together, it is not unreasonable to suppose the same thing here. It is not necessary that this central body should be visiblee The great use oſ it is not to ĩluminate, but to govern the motions of all the rest We know, however, that the existence of such a central body is not necessary. Two bodies, although not very unequal, may be projected vith such velocities, and in such directions, that they vill revolve for ever round their common centre of position and gravitationn. But such a system could hardly maintain any regularity of motion when a third hody is added. It may indeed be said, that the same transcendent wisdom, which has s0 exquisitely adapted all the circumstances of our system, may s0 adjust the motions of an immense number oſ bodies, that their disturbing actions shall accurately compensate each other. But still the beautiful simplicity that is manifest in what we see and understand, seems to varrant a like simplicity in this great system, and thereſore renders the existence of such a great central Regulator of the movements oſ all the most probable supposition. Sober reason will not be disposed to revolt at so glorious an extension oſ the works oſ God, however much it may overpower our ſeeble conceptionss. Nay, this analogy acquires additional veight and authority even from the transcendent nature oſ the universe to which it directs our thoughts. Nothing less magniſicent seems suitable to a Being of infinite perfections. ut we are not leſt to mere conjecture in support oſ this conception of a great universe, connected by mutual powers. There are cireumstances of analogy which tend greatly to persuade us of the reality oſ our conjecture circumstances vhich seem to indirate a connexion among the most distant objects of the creation visible ſrom our habitation. The light by which the fixed stars are seen is the same vith that by whieh we behold our Sun and his attending planets. It moves with the same velocity, as we discover by comparing the aberration of the fixed stars vith the eclipses oſ Jupiters satellitess. It is refracted and reflected according to the same laws. It consists oſ the same colourss. No opinion can be formed, thereſore, of the solar light, which must not also be adopted with respect to the light oſ the fixed starss The medium oſf vision must be acted on in the same manner by both, whether ve suppose it the undulation of an ether, or the emission of matter from the luminous body. In either case, a mechanical connexion obtains between those bodies, however distant, and our system. Such a connexion in mechanical properties induces us to suppose, that gravitation, which we know renches to a distance which exceeds all our distinet conceptions, extends also to the ſixed stars. If this be really the case, motion must ensue, even in producing the final ruin of the visible universe; and periodie motion is indispensably necessary for its permanency. Iſ all the fixed stars, and our Sun, were equal, and placed at equal distances, in the angles oſ regular solids, their mutual ruinous approach eould hardly be perceived. For, in every moment, they would still have the same relative positions, and an increase of brightness is all that could ensue aſter many ages. But if they were irregularly placed, and unequal, their relative positions would change, with an accelerated motion, and this change might become sensible aſter a long course oſ ages. If they have periodical motions, suited to the permaneney oſ the grand system oſ the universe, the changes of place may be much more sensible; and if ve suppose that their difference in brilliancy is owing to the differences in their distance from us, we may expect that these changes vill be most sensible n the brightest stars. Facts are not wanting to prove that such changes really obtain in the relative positions of the fixed starss This was ſirst observed by that great astronomer, mathematician, and philosopher, Dr Halley He found, aſter comparing the observations of Aristillus, Timochares, and Ptolemy, with those of our days, that several oſ the brighter stars had changed their situation remarkably (See Phil. Trans. No 855.) Aldebaran has moved to the south about 35. Syrius has moved south about 42, and Areturus, also to the south, about 83 The eastern shoulder of Orion has moved northward about 6 Observations in modern times shew, that Areturus has moved in 78 years about  8. This is a very sensible quantity, and is easily observed, by means of the small star b in its immediate neighbourhood. (See Phil. Trans. LXIII. also 17à8; and Mem. Par. 1755.) Syrius, in like manner, mereases its latitude about 2 in a century. (Mem. Par. 1755.) Aldebaran moves very irregularly. The bright star in Aquila has changed its latitude 6 since the time oſ Ptolemy, and ꝗ since the time oſ Tycho. This is easily seœn by its continual separation from the small star à. These motions seem to indicate a motion in our system. Most of the stars have moved toward the south. The stars in the northern quarters scem to widen their relative positions, while those in the south seem to contract their distances. Dr Herschel thinks, that a comparison of all these changes indicates a motion of our Sun with his attending planets toward the constellation Hercules (Phil Trans. 1788.) A learned and ingenious friend thinks ĩt not impossible to discover this motion by means of the aberration of the stars. Suppose the Sun and planets to be moving toward the Pole-star, and that his motion is 100 times greater than that of the Earth in her orbit (a very moderate supposition, vhen ve compare the orbital motion of the Earth with that of the Moon), every equatorial star vill appear about 8& north of its true place, when viewed through a common telescope, but only 29 when vie wed through a telescope filled with water. The declination oſ every such star will be Il less through a water telescope than through a common telescope. Stars out of the equator will have their declination diminished by a water telescope II' x cos. declination. In I761, the ingenious Mr Lambert published his Letters on Cosmology (in the German language), in which he has considered this subject with much attention and ingenuity. He treats of the motion of the Sun round a central bodyoſ systems of systems, or milky-ways, carried round an immense bodyoſ systems of such galaxie and of the great central body of the universe. In these speculations he infers much from final causes, and is oſien ingeniously romantic. But Lambert was also a true induetive philosopher, and makes no assertion with conſidence that is not supported by good analogies. The rtation of the Sun is a strong ground of belief to Mr Lambert that he has also a progressive motion. Tobias Mayer of Gottingen speaks in the same manner, in some of his dissertations published aſter his death by Lichtenberg. See also Bailly?s Account of Modern Astronomy, vol. II. 664, 689. Mayer of Manheim has also published thoughts to this effeet. See Comment. Acad. Palatin. IV. Prevost, Mem. Berlin 1781. Mitchel, Phil. Trans. LVII. 252. The gravitation to the fixed stars can produce no sensible disturbances of the motions oſ our system. This gravitation must be inconeeivably minute, by reason of the immense distanee; and, as they are in all quarters of the heavens, they ill nearly compensate each others action: and the extent oſ our system being but as a pont in comparison vith the distance oſ the nearest star, the gravitation to that star in all the parts of our system must be s nearly equal and parallel, that no sensible derangement can be effected, even aſter ages of ages. As a further circumstance oſ analogy vith a periodical motion in the whole visible universe, ve may adduee the remarkable periodical changes of brilliancy that are observed n many of the fixed stars. This was first observed (I think) in a star oſ the consteſlation Hydra. Montanari had observed it in 167 and' leſt some account of it in his papers, which Maraldi took notice of. Muraldi, after long searching in vain, found it in 1704, and sav several alternations of ĩts brightness and dimness, but without being able to aseertain their period. It was long lost again, till Mr Edward Pigot found it in 785. He determined its period to be 404 days. Since that time, this gentleman, and his father, vith a Mr Goodricke, have given more attention to this department of astronomy, and their example has been followed by other astronomerss Mr Pigot has given us, in Phil. Trans. 1786, a list of a great number of stars (above fiſfty) in which such periodical changes huve been observed, and has given partieular determinations oſ twelve or thirteen, ascertaining their periods with precisionn. The whole is followed by some very curious reflections. OF these stars, one oſ the most remarkable is x Cygni, having a period of 4153 days See Phil. Trans. No 843; also Mem. Acad Paris, 1719, 1759. Another remarkable star is, Ceti, having a period oſ 334 days. (See Phil. Trans. No 134, 346; Mem. Por. m) There is another such, close to  Cygni. The double star ? Lyræ exhibits very singular appearances, the southernmost sometimes appearing double, and sometimes accompanied by more little stars. Grischoſf oſ Berlin is positive that it has planets moving round it. Some of those stars have very short periodss The most remarkable is Algol, in the head of Medusa. Its period is Q Q0 49, in which its changes are very irregular, although perfſectly alike in every period. Its ordinary appearance is that oſ a star oſ the second magnitude. It suffers, for about 3 hours, a reduction to the appearance oſ a star of the ſourth or ſifth magnitude. Mr Goodricke observed similar variations in the star 3 Cephei. During 5 8 37 it ĩs a star of the ſiſth magnitude. For I' IBt it is of the second or third. It diminishes during 1 I8; remains S6 hours in its ſaintest state, and regains its brilliancy in 13 hours more. (Phil. Trans. 1786.) Mr Pigot observed the star » Antinoi to maintain its utmost brilliancy during 44 hours, and then gradually to fade during 62 hours, and, aſter remaining 80 hours of the fiſfth magnitude, it regains its greatest brilliancy in 36 hourss. (Phil. Trans. 1756.) Whatever may be the cause oſ these alternations, they are surely very analogous to what we observe in our sytem, the individuals of which, by varying their positions, and turning their diſſerent sides toward us, exhibit alternations oſ a similar kind; as, for example, the apparition and disparition of Saturn's ringg These circumstances therefore, encourage us to suppose a similarity oſ constitution in our system to the rest of the heavenly host, and render it more probable that all are connected by one general bond, and are regulated by simiar laws. Nothing is 50 likely for constituting this connexion as gravitation, and its comhination with projectile force and periodic motion tends to secure the permanency ofſ the whole. But I must at the same time observe, that such appearances in the heavens make it evident, that, notwithstanding the wise provision made for maintaining that order and utility which we behold in our system, the day may come  when the heavens shall pass away like a scroll that i js folded up, when the stars in heaven shall fail, and the  Sun shall cease to give his light.” The sustaining hand of God is still necessary, and the present order and harmony which he has enabled us to understand and to admire, is vholly dependent on his will, and its duration is one oſ the unsearchable measures oſ his providence. What is become of that dazzling star, surpassing Venus in brightness, which shone out all at once in November 15672, and determined Tycho Brahè to become an astronomer? He did not see it at half an hour past ſive, as he was crossing some fields in going to his laboratory. But, returning about ten, he came to a erovd of country folks who were staring at something behind him. Looking round, he saw this wonderful object. It was so bright that his staſ? had a shadow. It was of a dazzling white, with a little of a bluish tingee In this state it continued about three weeks, and then became yellowish and less brilliant. ITts brilliancy diminished fast after this, and it became more ruddy, like glowing emberss. Gradually fading, it was wholly invisible aſter fifteen months. A similar phenomenon is said to have eaused Hipparchus to devote himselſ to astronomy, and to his vast project oſ a catalogue of the stars, that posterity might know vwhether any changes happened in the heavens. And, in 1604, another such phenomenon, though much less remarkable, engaged for some time the attention oſ astronomers. Nor are these all the examples of the perishahle nature of the heavenly bodies. Several stars in the cata- logues of Hipparchus, of Ulugh Beigh, oſ Tycho Brahè, and even oſ Flamstead, are no more to be seen. They ar gone, and have left no trace. Should we now turn our eyes to objects that are nearer us, ve shall see the same marks of change When the Moon is vieed through a good telescope, magniſfying about I50 times, ve see her whole surſace occupied by volcanic eraters; some of them of prodigious magnitude. Some of them give the most unquestionable marks of several successive eruptions, ench destroying in part the crater of a former eruption The precipitous and craggy ap pearance of the brims of those craters is precisely such as would be produced by the ejection of rocky matter. In short, it is impossible, aſter such a view of the Moon, to doubt of her being greatly changed ſfrom her primitive state. Even the Sun himself, the source of light, and heat, and life, to the whole system, is not free from such changes. If we now look round us, and examine with judicious attention our own habitation, we see the most incontrovertible marks oſ great and general changes over the whole face oſf the Earth. Besides the slow degradation by the action of the winds and rains, by which the soil is gradually vashed away from the high lands, and carried by the rivers into the bed oſ the ocean, leaving the Alpine summits stripped to the very bone, we cannot see the face of any rock or erag, or any deep gully, which does not point out much more remarkable changes. These are not confined to such as are plainly owing to the horrid operations of volcanoes, but are universa. Except a fewv mountains, vhere we eannot confidently say that they are faetitious, and which for no better reason we eall primitive, there is nothing to be seen but ruins and convulsions What is now an elevated mountain has most evidently been at the hottom of the sen, and, previous to its being there, has æen habitable surſace. I It ĩs very true, that all our knowledge on this subject is merely superficia. The highest mountains, and deepest excavations, do not bear so great a proportion to the globe as the thickness of paper that covers a terrestrial globe bears to the bulk of that philosophical toy. We have no authority ſrom any thing that ve have seen, for forming any judgment concerning the internal constitution oſ the Earth. But we see enough to convince us, that it bears no marks of eternal duration, or of existing as it is, by its own energy. No! all is perishableall requires the sustaining hand of God, and is subject to the unsearchable designs of its Author and Preserver. There is yet another class of objects in the heavens, of which I have taken no noticee. They are called NEBULE, or NEBULOUS 5TARS. They have not the sparkling brilliancy that distinguishes the stars, and they are of a sensible diameter, and a determinate shape. Many of them, when viewed through telescopes, are clusters of stars, which the naked eye cannot distinguishh. The most remarkable oſ these is in the constellation Cancer, and is known by the name Præsepe. Ptolemy mentions it, and another in the right eye of Sagittariuss Another may be seen in the head of Orion. Many small clusters have been discovered by the help of glasses. The whole galaxy is nothing else. But there is another kind, in which the finest telescopes have discovered no clustering stars. Most of them have a star in or near the middle, surrounded with a pale light, vhich is brightest in the middle, and grows more faint toward the circumſerencee This circumſerence is distinet, or vell defined, and is not always round. One or two nebulæ have the ſorm of a luminous disk, with a hole in the middle like a millstonee. They are of various colours, white, yello, rose-coloured, &e. Dr Herschel, in several of the late volumes oſ the Philosophical Transactions, has given us the places oſ a vast number of nebulæ, vith curious descriptions of their peculiar appearances, and a series oſ most ingenious and interesting reflections on their nature and constitution. His Thoughts on the Structure of the Heavens are full oſ most curious speculation, and should be read by every philosopher. When ve reflect, that these singular objects are not, like the fixed stars, brilliant points, which become smaller when seen through finer telescopes, but have a sensible and measurable diameter, sometimes exceeding ; and when we also recolleet, that a ball of 200,0060,000 miles in diameter, which would fill the whole orbit of the Earth round the Sun, would not subtend an angle of two seeonds when taken to the nearest fixed star, what must- ve think of these nebulæ ? One of them is certainly some thousands of times higger than the Earths orbitt. Although our ſinest telescopes cannot separate it into stars, ĩt ĩs still probable that it is a cluster. It is not unreasonable to think, vith Dr Herschel, that this object, which requires a telescope to find it out, will appear, to a spectator in ĩts centre, much the same as the visible heavens do to us; and that this starry heaven, which to us appears so magnificent, is but a nebulous star to a speetator placed in that nebula. The human mind is almost overpowered by such a thoughtt. When the soul is fſilled with such conceptions oſ the extent of created nature, ve can scarcely avoid exclaiming, Lord, what then is man that thou art mindful  of him Under such impressions, David shrunk nto nothing, and feared that he should be forgotten amongst so many great objects oſf the divine attention His comfort and ground of relief ſfrom this dejeeting thought are remarkable:  Buti, says he,  thou hast made man but . a little lower than the angels, and hast erowned him  with glory and honour David corrected himsel? hy calling to mind how high he stood in the scale oſf God's vorks. He recognised his own divine original, and his alſi Iianęæe to the Author of al. Now, cheered and delighted, he cries out,  Lord, how glorious is thy name Tu=aæ remains yet another phenomenon, which is very evidently connected with the mechanism of the solar system, and is in itsalſ both curious and important. I mean the tides oſ our ocean. Although it appears improper to call this an astronomical phenomenon, yet, as it is most evidently connected with the position of the Sun and Moon, ve must attribute this connexion, in fact, to a natural eonnexion in the way of eause and efſeot. q the Tides. 572. Ir is a very remarkable operation of nature that we observe on the shores of the ocean, when, in the calmest weather, and most serene sky, the vast body of waters that bathe our eoasts advances on our shores, inundating all the flat sands, rising to a considerable height, and then as gradually retiring again to the bed of the ocean; and all this without the appearance of any cause to impel the waters to our shores, and again to draw them off. Twicœ every day is this repeated. In many places, this motion of the vaters is tremendous, the sea advancing, even in the calmest weather, with a high surge, rolling along the ſlats with resistless violence, and rising to the height of many ſathoms. In the bay of Fundy, it comes on with a prodigious noise, in one vast wave, that is seen thirty miles oſf; and the waters rise 100 and 120 feet in the harbour of Annapolis-Royal. At the mouth of the Severn, the ſlood also eomes up in one head, about ten ſeet high, bringing certain destruction to any small craſt that has been unfſortunately leſt by the ebbing waters on the ſlats; and as it passes the mouth of the Avon, ĩt sends up Vou. III. U that small river a vast body of water, rising forty or fiſty feet at Bristol. Such an appearance forcibly calls the attention of thinking men, and excites the greatest curiosity to discover the cause. Accordingly, it has been the object of research to all vho would be thought philosopherss We find very little, however, on the subject, in the writings oſ the Greeks The Greeks, indeed, had no opportunity of knowing much about the ebbing and flowing oſ the sea, as this phenomenon is searcely perceptible on the shores oſ the Mediterranean and its adjoining seass The Persian expedition of Alexander gave them the only opportunity they ever had, and his army was astonished at finding the ships left on the dry flats hen the sea retired Yet Alexander's preceptor, Aristotle, the prince of Greek philosophers, shews litile curiosity about the tides, and is contented with barely mentioning them, and saying, that the tides are most remarkable in great seas. 373. When we search aſter the cause of any recurring event, ve naturally look about for recurring concomitant circumstances; and when we find any that generally accompany it, we cannot help inferring some connexion. All nations seem to have remarked, that the flood- tide always comes on our coasts as the Moon moves across the heavens, and comes to its greatest height when the Moon is in one particular position, generally in the south-west. They have also remarked, that the tides are most remarkable about the time oſf nev Moon, and become more moderate by degrees every day, as the Moon draws near the quadrature, after vhich they gradually increase till about the time of full Moon, when they are nearly oſ their greatest height. They now lessen every day as they did before, and are lowest about the last quadrature, aſter which they increase daily, and, at the next new Moun, are a third time at the highest. These circumstances of concomitaney have been noticed by all nations, even the most uncultivated; and all seem to have concurred in ascribing the ebbing and flowing of the sea to the Moon, as the eſficient cause, or, at least, as the occasion, of this phenomenon, although without any comprehension, and oſten without any thought, in what manner, or by what powers of nature, this or that position of the Moon should be accompanied by the tide of flood or of ebb. Although this accompaniment has been every where remarked, it is liable to so many and so great irregularities, by winds, by freshes, by the change of seasons, and other causes, that hardly any two succeeding tides are observed to correspond with a precise position oſ the Moon. The only way, therefore, to acquire a knowledge of the connexion that may be useful, either to the philosopher or to the citizen, is to multiply observations to such a number, that every source oſ irregularity may have its period of operation, and be discovered by the return of the period. The inhabitants oſ the sea-coasts, and particularly the fishermen, were most anxiously interested in this research. 374. Accordingly, it was not long after the conquests of the Romans had given them possession of the coasts of the ocean, before they learned the chief circumstances or laws according to vhich the phenomena of the tides proceed. Pliny says, that they had their source in the Sun and the Moon. It had been inferred, from the gradual change of tides between new Moon and the quadrature, that the Sun was not unconcerned in the operation. Pytheas, a Greek merchant, and no mean philosopher, resident at Marseilles, the oldest Grecian colony, had oſten heen in Britain, at the tin-mines in Cornwall and its adjacent islandss. He had observed the phenomena vith great sagacity, and had collected the observations of the natives. Plutarch and Pliny mention these observations oſ Pytheas, some of them very delicate, and, the whole taken together, containing almost all that was known of the subjeet, till the dis- eoveries oſ Sir Isnac Newton taught the philosophers hn to look for in their inquiries into the nature of the tides und how to class the phenomena. Pytheas had not only observed, that the tides gradually abated from the times oſ new and full moon to the times of the quadratures, and then increased ngain; but, had also remarked, that this vulgar observation was not exact, but that the grentest tide vas always two days after new or full Moon, and the smallest was as long aſter the quadratures. He nlso eorreeted the common observation of the tides ſalling luter every day, by observing, that this returdution oſ the tides was much greater vhen the moon was m quadruture than when new or ſill. The tide-day, about the time of neW and full Moon, is really shorter by 50 than at the time of her quadrature. 375. This variation, in the interval of the tides, is cilled the PRIMING or the Lacõrnc of the tides, accorũing ns we refer them to lunaror slar timee. Pytheas probulily learned much of this nieety oſ observation from the Comiih ſishermen. By lians accoums, they had nets extendel along shore for several miles, and were therefore much interested in this matter. 876. Many observations on the seties of phenomena, whieh eompletes a period oſ the tides, are to be found n the books of hydrography, and the instructions for mariners, to whom the exact knowledge oſ the course oſ the tides is oſ the utmost importance. But ve never had any good colleetion of observations, from which the laws oſ their progress eould be learned, till the Academy of Paris proeured an order from government to the officers at the ports of Brest and Rocheſort, to keep a register oſ all the phenomena, and report it to the Academy. A register of observations was accordingly continued for six years, without interruption, at both ports, and the observations were piblished, forming the most complete series that is to be t with in any department of science, astronomy alone 5 excepted. The younger Cassini undertook the examination of these registers, in order to deduce ſrom them the general laws of the tidess. This task he executed with considerable success; and the general rules which he has given contain a much better arrangement of all the phenomena, their periods and changes, than any thing that had yet appeared. Indeed there had scarcely any thing heen added to the vague experience oſ illiterate pilots and fishermen, except two dissertations by Wallis and Flamstead, published in the Philosophical Transactions. 37. It is not likely, notwithstanding this excellent collection of observations, that our knowledge would have proceeded mueh farther, had not Newton demonstrated that a series of phenomena perſectly resembling the tides resulted from the mutual attraction of all matter. These consequences pointed out to those interested in the knowledge of the tides what vicissitudes or changes to look for —uvhat to look for as the natural or regular seriesvhat they are to eonsider as mere anomalieswhat periods to expect in the different variationsand whether there are not periods which comprehend the more obvious periods of the tides, distinguishing one period from another. As soon as this clue was obtained, every thing was laid open, and without it, the labyrinth was almost inextricable; for in the variations of the tides there are periods in which the changes are very considerable; and these periods continually cross each other, so that a tide which should be great, considered as a certain tide of one period, should be small, considered as a certain tide of another periodc. When it arrives, it is neither a great nor a small tide, but it prevents both periods from offering themselves to the mere observer. The tides afford a very strong example of the great importance of a theory for directing even our observations. Aided by the Newtonian theory, we have discovered many periods, in which the tides suſſer gradual changes, both in their hour and in their height, which com- monly are so implicated with one another, that they never would have been discovered without this monitor, whereas now, we can predict them all. 378. The phenomena of the tides are, in general, the following: 1. The waters oſ the ocean rise, from a medium height to that oſ high water, and again ebb avay from the shores, falling nearly as much below that medium state, and then rise again in a succeeding tide oſ flood, and again make high waterr. The interval between two succeeding high waters is about 12' 25, the half of the time of the Moons daily cireuit round the Earth, so that we have two tides oſ ſlood and two ebb tides in every 24 50. This is the shortest period of phenomena observed in the tidess. The gradual subsidence of the waters is such that the diminutions oſ the height are nearly as the squares oſ the times ſrom high water. The same may he said of the subsequent rise of the waters in the next flood The time oſ low water is nearly half way between the two hours of high water; not indeed exactly, it being observed at Brest and Rochefort that the flood tide commonly takes ten minutes less than the ebb tide. 379. As the different phenomena of the tides are chieſly distinguishable by the periods, or intervals of time in which they recur, it will be convenient to mark those periods by different names. Therefore, let the time of the apparent diurnal revolution oſ the Moon, viz. 24 50, be called a 'LUNAR DAY, and the 2dth part of it be called a Lv a: HOUR. To this interval almost all the vicissitudes of the tides are most conveniently referredd Let the name TinE DAY be given to the interval between two high waters, or two low vaters, succeeding each other with the Moon nearly in the same position. This interval comprehends tvo complete tides, one of the full seas happening when the Moon is above the horizon, and the next vhen she is under the horizonn. We shall also find it convenient to distinguish these tides, by calling the first the suPERIOR T1DE, and the other the INFERIOR TIDE. At new Moon they may be called the Morning and Evening tides. 380. 2. It is not only observed that we alvays have high water vhen the Moon is on some particular point oſ the compass (S. W. nearly) but also that the height of, full sea from day to day has an evident reference to the phases of the Moon. At Brest, the highest tide is always about a day and a half after full or change. If it should happen that high water ſalls at the very time of new or full Moon, the third ſull sea aſter that one is the highest of al. This is called the sPRING-TIDE. Each succeeding full sea is less than the preceding, till we come to the third full sea after the Moon's quadrature. This is the lowest tide of all, and it is called NEAP-TIDE. Aſter this, the tides again increase, till the next full or nev Moon, the third after which is again the greatest tide. 381. The higher the tide of flood rises, the lower does the ebb tide generally sink on that day. The total magnitude of the tide is estimated by taking the difſerence between high and low water. As this is continually varying, the best way of computing its magnitude seems to be, to take the half sum oſ two succeeding tides. This must always give us a mean value for the tide whose full sea was in the middle The medium spring-tide at Brest is about nineteen feet, and the neap-tide is about nine. Here then we have a period of phenomena, the time of vhich is halſ of a lunar month. This period comprehends the most important changes, both in respect of magnitude, and of the hours oſ high and low water, and several modifications of both oſ those circumstances, such as the daily difference in height, or in time. 3852. 3. There is another period, of nearly twice the same duration, which greatly modiſies all those leading circumstances. This period has a reſerence to the distance of the Moon, and thereſore depends on the Moons revolution in l PHYSICAL ABTRONOMY. her orbitt. All the phenomenn are increased when the Moon is nearer to the Earth. Therefore the highest spring-tide is observed when the Moon is in perigeo, and the next spring-tide is the smallest, becauss the Moon is then neurly in apogeo. This vill make a diſference of 23 feet from the medium height of spring-tide at Brest, and thereſore occasion a diſference of 53 between the greatest und the least. It is evident that as the perigean and apogean situation of the Moon may happen in overy part of a lunation, the equation for the height of tide depending upon this cireumstance may oſten run counter to the equation corresponding to the regular monthly series oſ tides, and vill seemingly destroy their regularity. 888. 4 The variation in the Suns distance also aſfect the tides, but not nearly so much as those in the distance oſ the Moon. In our winter, the spring-tides are greater than in summer, and the neap- tides are smaller. 354. 5. The declination, both of the Sun and Moon, aſfects the tides remarkably; but the effects are too intricate to be distinetly seen, till we perceive the causes on vhich they depend. 385. 6. All the phenomena are also modified by the latitude of the place of observation; and some phenomem occur in the high latitudes, which are not seen at all when the place of observation is on the equator. In particular, when the observer is in north latitude, and the Moon has north declination, that tide in which the Moon is above the horizon is greater than the other tide oſ the same day, vhen the Moon is below the horison. It will be the contrary, if either the observer or the Moon (but not both) have south declination. If the polar distance of the observer be equal to the Moons declination, he will see but one tide in the day, containing twelve hours flood and twelve hours ebb. 886. 7. To all this it must be added, that local cireumtunces of situation alter all the phenomena remarkably, 5 as frequently to leave scarcely any cireumstances of resemblance, except the order and periods in which the various phenomena follow one another. We must now endeavour to account for these remarkable movements and vicissitudes in the vaters oſ the ocean. 887. Since the phenomena oſ the planetary motions demonstrate that every particle of matter in this globe gravitates to the Sun, and since they are at various distances from his centre, it is evident that they gravitate unequally, and that, from this inequality, there must arise a disturbance of that equilibrium which terrestrial gravitation alone might produce. Iſ this globe be supposed either perfectly fluid and homogeneous, or to consist of a spherical nucleus ocovered with a ſluid, it is clear that the fluid must assume a perfectly spherical form, and that in this ſorm alone every particle will be in equilibrio. But when we add to the forces now acting on the vaters of the ocenn, their unequal gravitation to the Sun, this equilibrium is disturbed, and the ocean canmot remain in this form. We may apPly to the particles oſf the ocean every thing that we ſormerly said of the gravitation of the Moon to the Sun in the different points oſ her orbit; and the same construction in Fig. S1, that gave us a representation and measure oſ the forces which deranged the lunar motions, may be employed for giving us n notion of the manner in which the partieles of water in the ocean are aſfeetedl. The cirele OBC A may represent the watery sphere, and M any particle of the water. The central partiele E gravitates to the Sun vith a force which may be represented by E S. The gravitation of the particle M must be measured by MG. This force M G may be conceived as compounded of M F, equal and parallel to E S, and of M H. The foree M F oceasions no alteration in the gravitation of M to the Earth, and M H is the only disturbing forcee We found that this construetion may be greatly simplified, and that M I may be substituted for M H without any sensible error, because it never differs from it more than ,3,. We thereſore made EI, in Fig. 82, æ 8 MN, and considered M I as the disturbing force. This construction is applicable to the present question, with much greater accuracy, because the radius of the Earth is but the sixtieth part of that of the Moon's orbit. This reduces the error to 5535, à quantity altogether insensible. 388. Thereſore let OA CB (Fig. 45.) be the terraqueous globe, and CS a line directed to the Sun, and B E A the section by that circle which separates the illuminated from the dark hemispheree Let P be any particle, whether on the surface or within the mass. Let QP N be perpendicular to the plane BA. Make EIS3PN, and join PI. P Iis the disturbing force, when the line E S is taken to represent the gravitation of the particle E to the Sun. This force P I may be conceived to be compounded of two forces P E and P Q. P E tends to the centre of the Earth. P Q tends from the plane B A, or toward the Sun. Iſ this construction be made for every particle in the fluid sphere, it is evident that all the forces P E balance one another. Therefore they need not be considered in the present question. But the forces P Q evidently diminish the terrestrial gravitation of every particle At C the force P Q aets in direct opposition to the terrestrial gravity of the particlee And, in the situation P, it diminshes the gravity oſ the particle as estimated in the direction P N. There is therefore a foree acting in the direction N P on every particle in the canal P N. And this force is porportional to the distance of the particle ſrom the plane B A (ſor P Q is always = 8 P N). Thereſore the water in this canal cannot remain in its former position, its equilibrium being now destroyed. This may be restored, by adding to the column NP a small portion P ꝓ, whose weight may compensate the diminution in the weight of the column N I. A similar addition may be made to every such column per- pendicular to the plane BE A. This being supposed, the spherical figure of the globe vill be changed into that of an elliptical spheroid, having its axis in the line O C, and its poles in O and C. Without making this addition to every column N P, we may understand how the equilibrium may be restored by the waters subsiding all around the cirele whose seetion is B A, and rising on hoth sides oſ it. For it was shewn (820.) that in a fluid elliptical spheroid of gravitating matter, the gravitation oſ any particle P to all the other particles may be resolved into two forees P N and P M perpendicular to the plane BA and to the axis OC, and proportional to PNand PM; and that if the forces be really in this proportion, the whole will be in equilibrio, provided that the whole forces at the poles and equator are inversely as the diameters O C and BA. Now this may be the case here. For the forces superadded to the terrestrial gravitation of any particle are, lst, A foree PE proportional to P E. When this is resolved into the directions P N and PM, the forces arising in this resolution are as P N and P M, and therefore in the due proportion: 2d, the force P Q, vhich is also as P N. It is evident therefore that this mass may acquire such a protuberancy at O and C, that the force at O shall be to the force at B as B A to OC, or as E A o E C. We are also taught in sect. 341. what this protuberance must be. It must be such that four times the mean gravity of a particle on the surface is to five times the disturbing force at O or C as the diameter B A is to the excess of the diameter O C. This ellipticity is expressed by the same formula as in the former case, viz. 4c EC—EA = Bę = EC 389. Thus we have discovered that, in consequence of the unequal gravitation of the matter in the Earth to the Sun, the vaters vill assume the form of an oblong elliptical spheroid, having its axis directed to the Sun, and its poles in those points oſ the surface which have the Sun in x r the zenith and nadir. There the waters are highest above the surſace of a sphere oſ equal capacity. All around the circumference B E A, the waters are below the natural level. A spectator placed on this circumſerence sæes the Sum in the horizon. We can tell exactly what this proturberance EO—E A must be, because we know the proportions of all the forees. Let W represent the terrestrial gravitation, or the weight of the particle C, and G the gravilation of the same particle to the Sun, and let F be the disturbing force acting on a particle at C or at O, and thereſore=3 C E. Let S and E be the quantity of matter in the Sun and in the Earth. Then (Fig. 81) F: G æ SCE: CG S E G: W=c: Tm ?*) SCEXS CGXE therefore F: WNFę TE = 38 E CSæCõ: TI- But, beeause CS: ES? = ES: C6, ve have CS? x CG æ E 5 x ES,  E S. Thereſere 38 E F: Wæ ES BEC Nov E: S æ1I: 888343, and E EC: ES æ1: 23668. This will give 2 EC l: 12778541, / F: V. Finally, sW: 5F  CE: CE—A E. We shall find this to be nearly 24 inches. 390. Such is the figure that this globe would assume, had it been originally fluid, or a spherical nucleus covered vith a fluid of equal densit. The two summits of the watery spheroid would be raised about two ſeet above the equator or place of greatest depression. But the Earth is an oblate spheroid. IF we suppose it covered, to a moderate depth, with a fluid, the waters would acquire a certain ſigure, which has been considered ulrendy. Let the disturbing forcæ oſ the Sun net on this figuree. A change oſ figure must be produceid, and the waters under the Sun, and those in the opposite parts, will be elevated above their natural surface, and the ocœmn will be depresed on the circumſerence BEA. It is plain, that this change of figure will be almost the same in every place as if the Earth were a sphere. For the diſferen between the change produced by the Suns disturbing ſoree on the figure of the ftuid sphere or fluid spheroid, arises solely from the differenee in the gravitation of a particle of water to the sphere and to the spheroid. This difference, in any part of the surface, is exceedingly small, not being 8LVO of the whole gravitationn The difference, thereſore, in the change produced by the Sun cannot be of the whole change. Thereſore, since it is from the proportion oſ the disturbing force to the ſore oſ gravity that the elFiptieity is determined, it follows, that the change of figure is, to ill sense, the same, whether the Earth be a sphere or a spheroid whose eccentricity is less than ,35. Let us suppose, for the present, that the watery spheroid always has that form which produces an equilibrium in allits particles. This cannot ever be the ease, because s0me time must olapse before an accelerating ſorce ean produce any finite change in the disposition of the waters. But the contemplation oſ this figure gives us the most distimet notion of the forces that are in action, and of their eſfects; and we can aſterwards state the difference that must obtain, because the figure is not completely attãined. Supposing it really attained, it follos, that the ocean vill be most elevated in those places which have the Sun in the zenith or nadir, and most depressed in those places vhere the Sun is seen in the horizon. While the Earth turns round its axis, the pole of the spheroid keeps still toward the Sun, as if the waters stood still, and the solid nucleus turned round under it. The phenomena may perhaps be easier conceived by supposing the Earth to remain at rest, and the Sun to revolve round it in 2 hours from east to west. The pole of the spheroid follows him, as the card of a mariner's compass follows the magnet; and a spectator attached to one part of the nucleus vill sæ all the vicissitudes of the tidee Suppose the Sun in the equinox, and the observer also on the Earth's equator, and the Sun just rising to him. The observer is then in the lowest part of the watery spheroid. As the Sun rise above the horizon, the water also rises; and when the Sun is in the zenith, the pole of the spheroid has no& reached the observer, and the water is two feet deeper than it was at sun-rise. The Sun now approaching the western horizon, and the pole of the ocean going along with him, the observer sees the water subside again, and at sun-set it is at the same level as at sunrise. As the Sun continues his course, though unseen, the opposite pole of the ocean now advances from the east, and the observer sees the water rise again by the same degrees as in the way of forming a good guess of the state oſ the tide is to morning, and attain the height oſ two feet at midnight, and again subside to its lowest level at six o'clock in the following morning. ; Thus, in 24 hours, he has two tides oſ flood and two ebb tides; high water at noon and midnight, and low water at six o'clock morning and evening. An observer, not in the equator, ill see the same gradation oſ phenomena at the same hours; but the rise and fall of the water will not be so considerable, because the pole of the spheroid passes his meridian at some distance from him. If the spectator is in the pole of the Earth, he will see no change, because he is always in the lowest part of the watery spheroid. From this account oſ the simplest case, ve may inſer, that the depth oſf the water, or ĩts change oſ depth, depends entirely on the shape of the spheroid, and the place of it occupied by the observer. 391. To judge of this with accuracy, we must take notice of some properties of the ellipse which ſorms the meridian of the watery spheroidc Let A E a Q (Fig. 45.) represent this elliptical spheroid, and let BE b Q be the inscribed sphere, and A G a & the circumseribed sphere. Also let DF d ſ be the sphere of equal eapacity with the spheroid. This will he the natural figure of the ocean, undisturbed by the gravitation to the Sun. In a spheroid like this, so little different from a sphere, the elevation A D oſ its summit above the equally capacious sphere is very nearly double of the depression F E oſ its equator below the surſace of that sphere For spheres and spheroids, heing equal to à of the circumseribing cylinders, are in the ratio compounded of the ratio of their equators and the ratio of their axes. Therefore, since the sphere D F d f is equal to the spheroid AEaQ, we have CF2: X CD æ CE? x CA, and CE?: CFCD: CA. Make CE: CF CPF: Cæ, then CE: Cæ /CD: CA, and CE: Eæ CD: DA, and CE: CD E æ: DA. Now CE does not difſfer sensibly from CD (only eight inches in near 4000 miles), thereſore E æ may be accounted equal to DA But Eæ is not sensibly different from twice EF. Therefore the proposition is manifest. 392. In such an elliptical spheroid, the elevation IL oſ any point I above the inscribed sphere is proportional to the square of the cosine oſ its distance from the pole A, and the depression  I of this point below the surface of the circumseribed sphere is as the square of the sine of its distance from the pole AA Draw through the point I, H IM perpendicular to CA, and Iꝓ N perpendicular to CE. The triangles C IN and ꝓ IL are similar. Thereſore PI: IL=CI: IN, / rad.: cos. ICA but by the ellipse AB: pI=/AC: IN, = rad.: cos. ICA therefore AB: IL =rad.: cos ICA and IL is always in the proportion of cos.?, ICA, and is = AB x eos.?, ICA, radius being = I. In like manner, HI: IK= CI: IM æ rad.: sin. ICA and GE: HIæ EC: IM æ rad.: sin. ICA thereſore GE: XI æ rad.?: sin.? ICA and XI is& AB x sin.? ICA. 303. We must only know the elevations and depressions in respect oſ the natural level oſ the undisturbed ocæan This elevation ſor any point i is evidently i Iml  ABX co? i CA— 3 AB x cos. i CA—3, and the depression nr of a point r is kr— kn  AB x sin.? rCA—J AB, = AB x sin. r CA3. It will be convenient to employ a symbol for expressing the whole difference AB or GE between high and low water produced by the action oſ.the Bun. Let it be expressed by the symbol S. Also, let the angular distance from the summit, or from the S8un's place, he æ. The elevation m i is æS x eos.? ?2 S. The depression nr is æ x sin.? 7 S. 804. The spheroid intersects the equicapacious sphere in a point s0 situated, that S x cos. æ3 S æ O, that is, vhere cs.? æ  J. This is 540 44/. from the pole of the spheroid, and 350 16' from its equator, a situation that has several remarkable physical propertie We have alrendy seen, (326.) that on this part of the surface the gravitation is the same as if it were really a perſeet sphere. 395. The ocean is made to assume an eccentrie form, not only by the unequal gravitation of its waters o the Sun, but also by their much more unequal gravitation to the Moon; and although her quantity oſ matter is very small indeed, when compared with the Sun, yet being almost 400 times nearer, the inequality oſ gravitation is increased almost 400400 x 400 times, and may therefore produce a sensible effect. We cannot help presuming that it does, because the vicissitudes of the tides have a most distinct reference to the position of the Moon. Without going over the same groun again, it is plain that the waters vill be accumulated vnder the Moon, and in the opposite part of the spheroid, in the same manner as they are affected by the Suns action. Therefore, let M represent the elevation of the pole of the spheroid above the equicapacious sphere that is produced by the unequal gravitation to the Moon, and let & be the angular distance of any part oſ this spheroid from its pole. We shall then have The elevation of any point /M x cos.? vI M. The depression =M x sin. yà M. 896. In consequence of the simultaneous gravitation to both luminaries, the ocean must assume a form differing from both of these regular spheroids. It is a figure of difficult investigation; but all that we are concerned in may be determined with sufficient accuracy by means of the following considerations: We have seen, that the change of figure induced on the spheroidal ocean of the revolving globe is nearly the same as iſ it were induced on a perſect spheree Much more securely may ve say, that the change oſ figure, induced on the ocean already disturbed by the Sun, is the same that the Moon would have occasioned on the undisturbed revolving spheroid. We may thereſore suppose, without * The distance of the Sun being about 399 times that of the Moon, and the quantity of matter in the Sun about 335000 times that in the Earth, if the quantity of matter in the Moon were equal to that in the Earth, her accumulating foree would be 178 times greater than that of the Sun. We shall see that it is nearly ę́ times greater. From which we should infer, that the quantity of matter in the Moon is neorly ,; of that in the Earth. This seems the best information that we have on this subject. Vou. III. x any sensible error, that the change produced in any part of the ocean by the joint action of the two luminaries is the sum or the difference oſ the changes which they would have produced separately. 397. Thereſore, since the poles of both spheroids are in those parts of the ocean which have the Sun and the Moon in the zenith, it follows, that if æ be the zenith distance of the Sun ſrom any place, and & the zenith distance of the Moon, the elevation of the waters above the natural surface of the undisturbed ocean will be S x cos. æ J 8 + M X cos.? y3 M. And the depression in any place vill be S x sin.? æ/ S +M Xx sin.? y3 M. This may be better expressed as ſollows: Elevation =S x cos.? ?+ M x cos.? y35  M. Depression S8 x sin.? ? +M X sin.? y3à S M 95. Suppose the Sun and Moon to be in the same part of the heavenss The solar and lunar tides will have the same axes, poles, and equator, the gravitations to each conspiring to produce a great elevation at the combined pole, and a great depression all round the common equator. The elevation vill be  S +M, and the depression vill be 3 S  M. Therefore the elevation above the inscribed sphere (or rather the spheroid similar and similarly placed with the natural revolving spheroid) will be S +M. 899. Suppose the Moon in quadrature in the line EDM (Fig. 47) It is plain, that one luminary tends to produce an elevation above the equicapacious sphere AOBC, in the point of the ocean A immediately under it, where the other tends to produce a depression, and thereſore their forces counteract each other. Let the Sun be in the line ES. The elevation at S/S 3 5FM, 35]3M. The depression at M8 35 FM, / Sà M. The elevation at S above the inscribed spheroid =S M. The elevation at M above the same =M —S8B. Hence it is evident, that there will be high water at M or at S, wvhen the Moon is in quadrature, according as the accumulating force of the Moon exceeds or ſalls short oſ that of the Sun. Novw, it is a matter of observation, that when the Moon is in quadrature, it is high water in the open seas under the Moon, and low water under the Sun, or nearly 500. This observation confirms the conelusion drawn from the nutation of the Earth's axis, that the disturbing force of the Moon exceeds that of the Sun. This criterion has some uncertainty, owing to the operation of local circumstances, by which it happens, that the summit of the water is never situated either under the Sun or under the Moon. But even in this case, we find that the high water is reſerable to the Moon, and not to the Sun. It is always six hours of the day later than the high water at full or change. This corresponds with the elongation of the Moon six hours to the eastward. The phenomena of the tides shew further, that, at this time, the vaters under the Sun are depressed below the natural surſace of the ocean. This shews that M ĩs more than twice as great as S. 400. When the Moon has any other position besides these two, the place oſ high water must be some intermediate position. Tt must certainly be in the great circle passing through the simultaneous places of the two luminaries. As the place and time of high and low vater, and the magnitude of the elevation and depression, are the most interesting phenomena of the tides, they shall be the principal objects of our attention. The place oſ high water is that where the sum oſ the elevations produced by both luminaries above the natural surface of the ocean is a maximum. And the place of low water, in the great circle passing through the Sun and Moon, is that where the depression below the natural level of the ocean is a maximum. Therefore, in order to have the place of high water, we must find where 8 x cos.? 7æ+ M X eos.? y15 FM is a maximum. Or, since  M is a constant quantity, ve must find where S x cos'  + M X cos. 5 is a maximum. Now, accounting the tabular sines and cosines as fractions of radius, I, we have Cos.? æ  4 + à cos. 2 andc Cos. y=à + à cos. 2. For let ABS D (Fig. 48.) be a circle, and AS, BD two diameters crossing each other at right angles. Describe on the semidiameter CS the small cirele Cm Sh, having its centre in d. Let H C make any angle  with CS, and let it intersect the small cirele inh. Draw d h, S h, producing S h till it meet the exterior circle in s, and join As, Cs. Lastly, draw ho and s r perpendicular to CS. S h is perpendicular to Ch, and CS: Ch æ rad.: cos. H CS, and CS: CoR?: cos. H CS. The angle SC⸗ is evidently=2 8 CH =ES8d h and Ar=2 Co. Nov, if CS beæ1; Cr /cos.? 2æ; Ar/Il4 cos. 2æ. Therefore Co=4+} cos. 2æ. In like manner, cos.y/4 + cos. 25 Therefore ve must have s + S X cos àæ u ]- + a + M X cos. 2 5 2 a maximum; or, neglecting the constant - and the constant divisor 2, ve must have S x cos. 2æ +M Xx cos. 25 a maximum. Let ABSD (fig. 48.) be now a great circle of the Earth, passing through those points S and M of its surſace vwhich have the Sun and the Moon in the zenith. Drav the diameter S C A, and cross it at right angles by B CD. Eæt S d be to d a as the accumulating force of the Moon accumulating foree of the Sun, that is, as M to S, ortion we suppose known. Drav CM in the the Moon's place It will cut the small cirele l quantities i in some point m. Join m a. Let H be any point of the surface of the ocean. Drav CH, cutting the small circle in i. Drav the diameter h d. Drav mt and a æ perpendicular to h, and a y parallel to I , and jon m d. Also draw the chords m : and m V. In this construction, m d and d a represent M and S, the angle M C H /s, and S CH /aæ. It is farther manifest that the angle mdh—2 m Ch, /2y, and that di  M Xx cos. 2. In like manner, hd S /2 H CS, /2 x, and d 27/ d a x cos. 2 2,/8 x cos. 22. Therefore t æ S Xx cos. 2 æ +M Xx cos. 2 y. Moreover t æ2/a 3, and is a maximum vhen a 5 is a maximum. This must happen when a 5 coincides with a m, that is, vhen h d is parallel to a m. Hence may be derived the following construetion: Let AM S (fig. 49.) be, as before, a great cirele, whose plane passes through the Sun and the Moon. Let S and M be those points which have the Sun and the Moon in the zenith. Describe, as before, the cirele Cm S, cutting CM in m Make Sd: da&/m M: S, and join m a. Then, for the place of high vater, draw the diameter h d i parallel to m a, cutting the cirele CmS in h. Drav Ch H, cutting the surſace of the ocean in H and . Then H and H are the places of high waterr. Also draw CV, cutting the surface of the ocean in L and L. L and L' are the places of low water in this circle. Vor, draving mt and a æ perpendicular to h , ĩt is plain that ?æ/M Xcos. 25 +8 x eos. 2æ. And what vas just now demonstrated shews that ? x is in ĩts maximum state. Also, if the angle L CS /nu, and LCM æ æ, ĩt ĩs evident that d æ—2S8 x cos. a d x,/S8 x cos.  d S, =S xcos. 2 CS8, /S xcos. 2 L CS8,/ S xcos. 2u; and, in like manner, 1d M Xx cos. 2æ; and thereſore ſ = 8 x cos. 2u +M X cos. 2 æ, and it is a maximum. It is plain, independent of this construction, that the places of high and low water are 90 asunder; for the two hemispheres of the ocean must be similar and equal, and the equator must be equidistant from its poles. 401. Drav d* perpendicular to m a. Then, iſ d S be taken to represent the whole tide produced by the Moon, that is, the whole difference in the height of high and low water, m a ill represent the compound tide at H, or the difference between high and low water corresponding to that situation of the place H with respect to the Sun and Moon. mf will be the part of it produced by the Moon, and a f the part produced by the Sun. For the elevation at H above the natural level is S x cs.æ3F +M x c3?3, and the depression below it at L is Sxsinu3+M x sin?7—ꝗ But sin? u m cos.? æ, and sin.? æ =cos.? y3. Therefore the depression at Lis S X s773+ M x cos.? y3J. The sum of these makes the whole difference between high and low vater, or the whole tidee Therefore the tide is=S x  co;? æI +M X ẽ cos.y TI. But 2 cos.? æI=cos. 2 x, and 2 cos. y I = cos. 25. Thereſore the tide/S x cos. 2 æ +M X cos. 2y. Nov it is plain that m // m d cos. d mf, and that the angle dm?f/ mdh, = mCh, =2 y. Therefore m d x eos. dm f/M x cos. 2 5. In like manner a f  S x cos. 2 . The point a must be within or without the circle C m S, according as M is greater or less than S, that is, according as the accumulating force of the Moon is greater or less than that of the Sun. It appears also that, in the first case, l will be nearer to M, and in the second case, it will be nearer to S. Thus have ve given a construetion that seems to express all the phenomena of the tides, as they will occur to a speetator placed in the circle passing through those points which have the Sun and Moon in the zenith. It marks the distance of high vater from those two places, and therefore, if the luminaries are in the equator, it marks the time that will elapse between the passage of the Sun or Moon over the meridian, and the moment of high water. It also expresses the whole height of the tide of that day. And, as the point H may be taken without any reference to high water, we shall then obtain the state of the tide for that hour, when it is high water in its proper place H. By considering this construetion for the different relative positĩons of the Sun and Moon, we shall obtain a pretty distinct notion of the series of phenomena which proceed in regular order during a lunar month. 402. To obtain the greater simplicity in our first and most general conclusions, we shall first suppose both luminaries in the equator. Also, abstracting our attention from the annual motion of the Sun, we shall consider only the relative motion of the Moon in her synodical revolution, stating the phenomena as they occur when the Moon has gOt a certain number of degrees away from the Sun; and e shall always suppose that the watery spheroid has attained the form suited to its equilibrium in that situation of the tvo luminaries The conclusions vill ſfrequenſly differ much from common observationn. But we shall afterwards find their agreement very satisſactory. The reader is thereſore, expected to go along with the reasoning employed in this discussion, although the conclusions may ſrequently surprise him, heing very diſferent from his most familiar observations. 408. I. At new and full Moon, we shall have high water at noon, and at midnight, vhen the Sun and Moon are on the meridian. For in this case CM, a m, CS, d h, CH, all coincide. 404. 2. When the Moon is in quadrature in B, the place of high water is also in B, under the Moon, and this happens when the Moon is on the meridian. or when M C is perpendicular to CS, the point m coincides with C, a m with a C, and d : with d C. 405. 3.. While the Moon passes ſrom a syigy to the next quadrature, the place of high water follows the Moon's place, keeping to the westward of it. It overtakes the Moon in the quadrature, gets to the eastward of the Moon, (as it is represented at M H?, by the same construction), preceding her while she passes forward to the next syrigy, in A, where it is overtaken by the Moon's placee For vhile M is in the quadrant S B, or AD, the point h is in the arch S8 m. But when M is in the quadrant B A or D S, h* is without or heyond the arch S m* (counted eastward from ſfrom S.) Therefore, during the first and third quarters of the lunation, ve have high water aſter noon or midnight, but before the Moons southing. But in the second and ſourth quarters, it happens aſter the Moon's southing. 406. 4. Since the place of high water coincides with the Moons place both in syzigy and the following quadrature, and in the interval is between her and the Sun, it follows that it must, during the first and third quarters, be gradually left behind, for a while, and then must gain on the Moon's place, and overtake her in quadraturee. There must therefore be a certain greatest distance between the place of the Moon and that of high water, a certain maximum of the angle M C H. This happens vhen H' CS is exaetly 45. For then  d S is 90, m a is perpendicular  o S, and the angle a m d is a maximum. Now a m d =m d ;, =2Y . 407. When things are in this state, the motion of high water, or its separation from the Sun to the eastward, is equal to the Moon's easterly motionn. Therefore, at new and full Moon, it must be' slower, and at the quadratures it must be swiſter. Consequently, vhen the Moon is in the octant, 450 from the Sun, the interval between two successive southings of the Moon, which is alvays 24 50 nearly, must be equal to the interval of the two concomitant or superior high waters, and each tide must occupy 12 25, the halſ of a lunar day But at new or full Moon, the interval between the two successive high waters must be less than 12 25, and in the quadratures it must be more. 408. The tide day must be equal o the lunar day only when the high water is in the octantss It must be shorter at new and full Moon, and vhile the Moon is passing from the second octant to the third, and from the fourth to the first. And it must exceed a lunar day while the Moon passes from the first octant to the seeond, and from the third to the fourth. The tide day is always greater than a solar day, or twenty-four hourss. For, while the Sun makes one round of the earth, and is again on the meridian, the Moon has got about 139 east of him, or SM is nearly 1° and S H is nearly 9, so that the Sun must pass the meridian about 85 or 6 minutes beſore it is high water. Such is the law of the daily retardation ealled the priming or lagging of the tides At new and full Moon it is nearly 3S5, and at the quadratures it is 85, so that the tide day at new and full Moon is 24 35, and in the quadratures it is 25 25 nearly. Our construction gives us the means of ascertaining this circumstance of the tides, or interval between two succeeding full seas, and it may be thus expressed: 409. The synodical motion oſ the Moon is to the synodical motion of the high water as m a to mf. For, take a point u very near to m. Draw u a and u d, and drav d i parallel to a u, and with the centre a, and distance a u, describe the areh u v, which may be considered as a straight line perpendicular to ma. Then u m and ĩ h are respectively equal to the motions oſf M and H (though they subtend twice the angless. The angles a u v, d u m, are equal, being right angles Therefore m u v/a u d, a m d, and the triangles m u v, d mf, are similar, and the angles uam, i dh are equal, and therefore uv: i h=ma: hd, /mma: md um: uv= md: mf therefore u m: i h ma: mf When m coincides with S, that is, at new or ſull Moon, m a coincides with S a, and m f with S d. But when m coincides with C, that is, in the quadratures, m a coincides vith C a, and mf with C d. 410. Hence it is easy to see, that the retardation oſ the tides at new and full Moon is to the retardation in the quadratures as C a to S a, that is as M + S to M S. When the high vater is in the octant, m a is perpendicular to S a, and therefore a and f coincide, and the synodical motion oſ the Moon and oſ high water are the same, as has been already observed. Let us now consider the elevations of the water, and the magnitude of the tide, and its gradual variation in the course of a lunation This is represented by the line m a. 41l. This series oſ changes is very perceptible in our construetionn. At new and full Moon, m a coincides with S a; and in the quadratures, it coincides with C a. Therefore, the spring-tide is to the neap-tide as S a to C a, that is, as M + S to M38S. From ne or ſull Moon the tide gradually lessens to the time of the quadrature We also see that the Sun contributes to the elevation by the part af, til the high water is in the octants, for the point ſ lies between m and a. Aſter this, the action of the Sun diminishes the elevation, the point ſ then lying beyond a. 412. The momentary change in the height of the whole tide, that is, in the difference between the high and low water, is proportional to the sine oſf twice the arch M H. It is measured by d fin our construction. For, let m u be a given arch of the Moons synodical motion, such as a degree. Then m v is the difference between the tides m a and u a, corresponding to the constant arch of the Moons momentary elongation from the Sun. The similarity of the triangles m u v and m d f gives us m u: mv/nm d: df. Now m u and m d are constant. Therefore m v is proportional to df, and m d: d f/ rad.: sin. d m f, sin. md h, =sin. ZM CH. Hence it ſollows that the diminution of the tides is most rapid vhen the high water is in the octants. This will be found to be the difference between the twelfth and thirteenth tides, counted from new or ſull Moon, and between the seventh and eighth tides after the quadraturess. If m u be taken  the Moons daily elongation from the Sun, which is 60 0 nearly, the rule will give, with suſficient accuracy, à the difference between the two superior or the two inferior tides immediately succeeding It does not give the difference between the two immediately succeæding tides, because they are alternately greater and lesser, as will appear afterwards. 413. Having thus given a representation to the eye of the various circumstances of these phenomena in this simple case, it would be proper to shew how all the different quantities spoken of may he computed arithmeticall The simplest method for this, though perhaps not the most elegant, seems to be the following: In the triangle m d a, the two sides m d and d a are given, and the contained angle m d a, vhen the proportion of the forces M and S, and the Moon's elongation M C S are given. Let this angle m d a be called . Then make M + S: a21Db a+h M —S =tan, a: tan. b. Then y=j&, and ? 9 For M +8: M S md +da: mdd a, = tan. ma d +amd tan ma damd tan. ReLæ æ]/ 2 2 , = tan. 7 4 4: tan. u = tan. a: tan. b. Now 5 + 5 =2æ and T+5y u =2y. There+l fore a +b=2 æ and ab 2F, and u 9 , and y a2D 7 414. It is of peculiar importance to know the greatest separation of the high water from the Moon. This happens when the high water is in the octant. In this situa- tion it is plain that m à: d a, that is, M: S,  rad.: sin. d m a, =rad.: sin. 2 5, and thereſore sin. 2 5 Hence 2y and v are found. 415. It is manifest that the applicability of this construetion to the explanation of the phenomena of the tides depends chiefly on the proportion oſ Sd to d a, that is, the proportion of the accumulating force of the Moon to that of the Sun. This constitutes the species of the triangle m d a, on which every quantity depends. The question now is, What is this proportion? Did we know the quantity of matter in the Moon, it would be decided in a minutee. The only observation that can give us any information on this subject is the nutation oſ the Earth's axiss. This gives at once the proportion of the disturbing forces. But the quantities observed, the deviation of the Earths axis from its uniform conical motion round the pole oſ the ecliptic, and the equation of the precession of the equinoctial points are much too small for giving us any precise knowledge of this ratio. Fortunately, the tides themselves, by the modification vhich their phenomena receive ſfrom the comparative magnitude of the ſorces in question, give us means of discovering the ratio of S to M. The most obvious circumstance of this nature is the magnitude of the spring and neap- tides. Accordingly, this was employed by Newton in his theory of the tidess. He collected a number of observations made at Bristol and at Plymouth, and, stating the spring-tide to the neap-tide as M +8 to M8, he said that the force of the Moon in raising the tide is to that of the Sun nearly as 44 to I. But it was soon perceived that this was a very uncertain method. For there are scarcely any two places where the proportion between the spring-tide and the neaptide is the same, even though the places be very near each other. This extreme diserepancy, while the proportion was observed to be invariable for any individual place, shewed that ĩit was not the theory that was in ſault, but that the local circumstances of situation were such as aſfected very differently tides of different magnitudes, and thus changed their proportion. It was not till the noble collection of observations was made at Brest and Rocheſort that the philosopher could assort and combine the immense variety of heights and times of the tides, so as to throw them into classes to be compared vith the aspeet of the Sun and Moon according to the Newtonian theory. M. Cassini, and, aſter him, M. Daniel Bernoulli, made this comparison with great care and discernment; and on the authority of this comparison, M. Bernoulli has founded the theory and explanation contained in his excellent Dissertation on the Tides, which shared with MLaurin and Euler the prize given by the Academy of Paris in 1740. M. Bernoulli employs several circumstances of the tides for ascertaining the ratio of M to S. He employs the law of the retardation of the tides. This has great advantages over the method employed by Newtonn. Whatever are the obstructions or modifieations oſ the tides, they will operate equally, or nearly so, on two tides that are equal, or nearly equal. This is the case with two suceeeding tides of the same kind. The Moons mean motion from the Sun, in time, is about 503 minutes in a day The smallest retardation, in the vicinity of new and full Moon, is nearly 35, wanting 15; of the Moon's retardationn. Therefore, by art. 412, M: S æ35: 164, /5: 2 nearly. The longest tide-day about the quadratures is 25 25, exceeding a solar day 85, and a lunar day 344. Therefore M: Sæ65: 84, æ 5: 24h nearly. The proportion of M to S may also be inferred by a direct comparison of the tide-day at new Moon and in the quadratures. 85:85 æ/M S: M +S. Therefore M: 58æB85+85 885 5.20. 2 2 It may also be discovered by observing the greatest separation of the place of high water from that oſ the Moon, or the elongation of the Moon when the tide-day and the lunar day are equal. In this case 5 is observed to be nearly 120 3. Therefore a = sin. 250, and M: /2: 23 nearly. Thus it appears that all these methods give nearly the same result, and that we may adopt 5 to 2 as the ratio oſ the two disturbing forces. This agrees extremely well with the phenomena of nutation and precession. Instead of inferring the proportion of M to S, from the quantity oſ matter in the Moon, deduced ſrom the phenomena of nutation, as is affected by DcAlembert and La Place, I am more disposed to inſer the mass of the Moon from this determination of M: S, confirmed by so many coincidences oſ different phenomena. Taking 5: 2, 18 as the mean of those determinations, and employing the analogy in sect. 227, ve obtain for the quantity of matter in the Moon nearly 5, the Earth heing I. If the forces of the two luminaries were equal, there would be no high and low water in the day of quadrature. There would be an elevation above the inseribed spheroid of  M 435 all round the circumſference of the circle passing through the Sun and Moon, forming the ocean into an oblate spheroid. 416. Since the gravitation to the Sun alone produces an elevation of 2*4 inches, the gravitation to the Moon will raise the waters 58 inches; the spring-tide will be 24 + 58, or 624 inches, and the neap-tide 333 inches. 417. The proportion now adopted must be considered as that corresponding to the mean intensity of the accumulating forces. But this proportion is by no means constant, by reason oſ the variation in the distances oſ the luminaries. Calling the Sun's mean distance 1000, it is 988 in January and 1017 in July. The Moons mean distance being 1000, she is at the distance 1055 when in apogeo, and 945 when in perigeo. The action of the luminaries in producing a change of figure varies in the inverse triplicate ratio oſ the distances (280.) Therefore, if 2 and 5 are taken ſor the mean disturbing forces of the Sun and Moon, we have the following measures oſ those forces: Sun. Moon. Apogean 1,901 4,258 Mean 2,. 5 Perigean 2, 105 5,025 Hence we see that M: S may vary from 5,995: 1,901 to 4,255: 2,105, that is, nearly from 6: 2 to 4: 2. The general expression of the disturbing force oſ the M ill beM æ 2 s h D and d ex oon w =iS }E&  Vhere an express the mean distances oſ the Sun and Moon, and a and ; any other simultaneous distances. The solar force does not greatly vary, and need not be much attended to in our computations for the tidess. But the change in the lunar action must not be neglected, as this greatly affects both the time and the height oſ the tide. 418. First, as to the times. I. The tide-day following spring-tide is 24 274 when the Moon is in perigeo, and 24' 33 when she is in apogeo. 2. The tide-day following neap-tide is 25 I5 in the first case, and 25 40' in the second. 3. The greatest interval between the Moons southing and high water (which happens in the octants) is 3 when the Moon is in perigeo, and 6I' when she is in apogeo, v being & 45 and 15 15. 419. The height of the tide is still more affected by the Moon's change oſ distance. 5 If the Moon is in perigeo, when new or ſull, the springtide will be eight feet, instead of the mean spring-tide oſ seven feet. The very next spring- tide will be no more than six feet, because the Moon is then in apogeo. The neaptides, which happen between these very unequal tides, will be regular, the Moon being then in quadrature, at her mean distance. But if the Moon change at her mean distance, the springtide will be regular, but one neap-tide will be ſour feet, and another only two feet. We see therefore that the regular monthly series of heights and times corresponding to our construction can never be observed, hecause in the very same, or nearly the same period, the Moon makes all the changes of distance vhich produce the effects above mentionedc As the effeet produced by the same change of the Moon's distance is diſferent according to the state of the tide which it affects, it is by no means easy to apply the equation arising ſrom this cause. 420. As a sort of synopsis of the whole oſ this deseription of the monthly series oſ tides, the following Table by Bernoulli will be of some usee The ſirst column contains the Moons elongation S M (eastward) from the Sun, or from the point opposite to the Sun, in degrees. The second column contains the minutes of solar time that the moment of high vater precedes or ſollows the Moons southing. This corresponds to the arch H M. The third column gives the arch S H, or nearly the hour and minute oſ the day at the time of high water; and the fourth œlumn contains the height oſ the tide, as expresssed by the line m a, the space S a being divided into 1000 parts, as the height oſ a spring-tidee Note that the elongation is supposed to be that oſ the Moon at the time of her southmg. TABLE I 420. It is proper here to notice a cireumstance, of very general observation, and which appears inconsistent with our construction, which states the high water oſ neap-tides to happen when the Moon is on the meridian. This must make the high water of neap-tides six hours later than the high water of spring-tides, supposing that to happen when the Sun and Moon are on the meridian. But it is universally observed, that the high water of tides in quadrature is only about five hours and ten or twelve minutes later than that of the tides in syzigy. This is owing to our not attending to another circumstance, namely, that the high water which happens in syZigy, and in quadrature, is not the high water of spring and of neap-tides, but the third before them. They corVou. III. Y respond to a position of the Moon 19° westward of the syzgy or quadrature, as ill be more particularly noticed aſterwards. At these times, the points of high water are 132 west of the syzigy, and 20 vest of the quadrature, as appears by our eonstruetion. The lunar hours corresponding to the interval are exactly 5 02, which is nearly ib 1solar hours. 421. Hitherto ve have considered the phenomena of the tides in their most simple state, by stating the Moon and the Sun in the equator. Yet this can never happen; that is, ve can never see a monthly series oſ tides nearly corresponding with this situation of the luminaries. In the course of one month, the Sun may continue within six degrees of the equator, but the Moon will deviate from it, from I8 to 25 or 30 degreess This will greatly affect the height of the tides, causing them to deviate ſrom the series expressed by our construetion. It still more affects the time, particularly of low waterr. The phenomena depend primarily on the zenith distances of the luminaries, and, when these are known, are accurately expressed by the construction. But these zenith distances depend hoth on the place oſ the luminaries in the heavens, and on the latitude of the observer. It is difſicult to point out the train of phenomena as they occur in any one place, because the figure assumed by the vaters, although its depth be easily ascertained in any single point, and for any one moment, is too complicated to be explained by any general description. It is not an oblong elliptical spheroid, formed by revolution, except in the very moment oſ new or full Moon. In other relative situations of the Sun and Moon, the ocean vill not have any section that is cireular. Its poles, and the position oſ its equator, are easily determined. But this equatorial seetion is not a eirele, but approaches to an elliptieal form, and, in some cases, is an exact ellipse. The longer axis oſ this oval is in the plane pussing through the. Sun and Moon, and its extremities are in the points of low water for this cirele, as determined by our constructionn Its shorter axis passes through the centre of the Earth, at right angles to the other, and it extremities are the points of the lowest low water. In these Lvo points, the depression below the natural level of the ocean is always the same, namely, the sum of the greatest depression produced by each luminary. It is subjected, therefore, only to the changes arising from the changes of distanee of the S8un and Moon. Thus it appears, that the surface oſ the ocean has generally four poles, two of which are prolate or protuberant, and two of them are compressedlc This is most remurkably the case when the Moon is in quadrature, and there is then a ridge all round that seetion whieh has the Sun and Moon in its plane. The seotion through the four poles, upper and lower, is the place of high water all over the Earth, and the section perpendicular to the axis of this is the place of low water in all parts of the Earth. Hence it follows, that when the luminaries are in the plane of the Earths equator, the two depressed poles of the watery spheroid coincide with the poles of the Earth; and vhat we have sqid of the times of high and low water, and the other states of the tide, are exact in their application. But the heights of the tides are diminished as we recede from the Earth's equator, in the proportion of radius to the cosine of the latitude. In all other situations of the Sun and Moon, the phenomena vary exceedingly, and cannot easily be shewn in a regular trainn. The position of the high water seetion is oſten mueli inclined to the terrestrial meridians, s0 that the interval between the transit of the Moon and ſhe transit of this section aeross the meridian oſ places in the same meriiiin; is oſten very different. Thus, on midsummer day, suppose the Moon in her last quadrature, and in the node, therefore in the equator. The ridge which forms high ater lies so oblique o the meridians, that when the Moon arrives at the meri- dian of London, the ridge of high water has passed London about two hours, and is now on the north coast of America. Hence it happens, that we have no satisfactory account of the times oſ high water in different places, even though we should lear it ſor a particular day The only vay of forming a good guess of the state of the tides is to have a terrestrial globe before us, and having marked the places of the luminaries, to lap a tape round the globe, passing through these points, and then to mark the place of high water on that line, and cross it with an arch at right angles. This is the line of high waterr. Or, a circular hoop may be made, crossed by one semicirelee Place the cirele so as to pass through the places of the Sun and Moon, setting the intersection with the semicirele on the caleulated place of high waterr. The semicircle is now the line oſ high water, and if this armilla be held in its present position, while the globe turns once round vithin it, the succession of tide, or the regular hour oſ high water for every part oſ the Earth will then be seen, not very distant from the truth. At present, in our endeavour to point out the chief modifications of the tides which proceed from the deelination of the luminaries, or the latitude of the place of observation, ve must content ourselves with an approximation, which shall not be very far from the truth. It will be sufficiently exact, if we attend only to the Moon. The effects oſ declination are not much affected by the Sun, because the difference between the declination oſ the Moon and that oſ the pole oſ the ocean can never exceed six or seven degrees When the great cirele passing through the Sun and Moon is much inclined to the equator (it may even be perpendicular to it), the luminaries are very near ench other, and the Moon's place hardly deviates from the line of high water. At present, ve shall consider the lunar tide only. 422. Let NQS E (Fig. 50.) represent the terraqueous globe, NS being the axis, EQ the equator, and O the cen- tree Let the Moon be in the direction OM, having the declination BQ. Let D be any point on the surſace of the Earth, and CD L its parallel of latitude, and N D S its meridian. Let B F & f be the elliptical surface of the ocean, having its poles B and & in the line OM. Let OF be its equator. As the point D is carried along the parallel CDL, it will pass in succession through all the states of the tide, having high water when it is in C, and in L, and low vater when it gets into the intersection d of its parallel C L with the equator d F of the watery spheroid. Draw the meridian Nd G through this intersection, cutting the terrestrial equator in G. Then the arch Q G, converted into Iunar hours, will give the duration of ebb of the superior tide, and G E is the time oſ the subsequent flood of the inferior tide. It is evident that these are unequal, and that the whole tide G Q G, consisting of a flood- tide G Qand ebb-tide QG, while the Moon is above the horizon (vhich we called the superior tide), exceeds the duration of the whole inferior tide GE G by four times G O (reckoned in lunar hours.) IF the spheroid be supposed to touch the sphere i in f and F, then C is the height of the tidee At L, the height of the tide is L L, and if the concentric circle L' q be described, Cq is the difference hetween the superior and inferior tides. From this construction we learn, in general, that when the Moon has no declination, the duration of the superior and inferior tides of one day are equal over all the Earth. 428. 2. If the Moon has declination, the superior tide vill be of longer or of shorter duration than the inferior tide, according as the Moons declination B Q, and the latitude C Q of the place of observation are oſ the same or of different denominations. 424. 3. When the Moons declination is equal to the colatitude of the place of observation, or exceeds it, that is, if B Q is equal to No, or exceeds it, there will be only a superior or inferior tide in the course oſ a lunar day. For, in this case, the parallel of the place oſ observation vill pass through #, or between N and , as  m. 425. 4. The sine oſ the arch G O is = tan. lat. x tan. declin. For rad.: cot. d O Gæ tan. d G: sin. G O, anũ 5in. G O æ tan. d G x cot. d OG. Nov, d G is the latitude, and d O G is the codeclination. 426. The heights oſ the tides are affected in the same vay by the declination of the Moon, and by the latitude of the place oſ observationn. The height oſ the superior tide exceeds that oſ the inferior, if the Moon's declination is of the same denomination with the latitude of the place, and vice versũ. It ofſten happens that the reverse of this is uniformly observed. Thus, at the Nore, in the entry to the river Thames, the inferior tide is greater than the superior, vhen the Moon has north declination, and viee versũ. But this happens because the tide at the Nore is only the derivation of the great tide which comes round the north of Seotland, ranges along the eastern coasts oſ Britain, and the high water of a superior tide arrives at the Nore, while that oſ an inſerior tide is formed at the Orkney Islands, the Moon being under the horizon. 427. The height of the tide in any place, occasioned hy the action of a single luminary, is as the square oſ the cosine of the zenith or nadir distance of that luminary. Hence we derive the ſollowing construetion, which will express all the modifications of the lunar tide produced by declination or latitude. It will not be far from the truth, even ſor the compound tide, and it is perfectly exact in the case of spring or neap- lides. Vith a radius C QFig. 5I.) taken as the mensure oſ the whole elevation of a lunar tide, deseribe the cirele E P QQ, to represent a terrestrial meridian, vhere P and ꝓ are the poles, and E Q the equator. Bisect CP in O, and round O deseribe the circle P B C D. Let M be that ' point oſ the meridian vhich has the Moon in the zenith, and let Z be the place of observationn. Draw the diameter Z CN, cutting the small circle in B, and M Cm cutting it in A. Drav A parallel to E Q. Drav the diameter B O D of the inner circle, and drav IX, GH, and AF perpendicular to BD. Lastly, drav ID, IB, AD, AB, and CIM, cutting the meridian in M. After half a diurnal revolution, the Moon comes into the meridian at M, and the angle M' CN is her distance from the nadir of the observerr. The angle TCB is the supplement oſ ICN, and is also the supplement of IDB, the opposite angle oſ a quadrilateral in a circle Thereſore IDB is equal to the Moons nadir distance Also ADB, being equal to ACB, is equal to the Moons Zenith distance. Therefore, accounting DB as the radius oſ the tables, DF and DX are as the squares oſ the cosines oſ the Moons zZenith and nadir distances; and since PC, or DB, was taken as the measure oſ the whole lunar tide, DF vill be the elevation oſ high water at the situation Z oſ the observer, vhen the Moon is above his horizon, and DXis the height oſ the subsequent tide, vhen the Moon is under his horizon, or, more accurately, iĩt is the height of the tide seen at the same moment with DF, by a speetator at ? in the same meridian and paralle. (For the subsequent tide, though only twelve hours after, vill be a little greater or less, according as they are on the increase or decrease) DF, then, and DE, are proportional to the heights of the superior and inſerior tides of that day. Moreover, as AI is bisected in G, F X is bisected in H, and D H is the arithmetieal mean between the heights oſ the superior and inferior tides Accounting O C as the radius oſ the tables, AG is the sine of the arch A C, which measures tvice the angle M C Q, the Moons declination. OG is the cosine oſ twice the Moons decelinationn. Also the angle BOG is equal to twice the angle BCQ, the latitude of the observer. Thereſore OH æ ecos. 2 decl. x cos. 2 lat.; and DH  DO + OH, / M Xx Q L eon  deol Xx cos. 2 lat This value oſ the medium tide will be found of continual use. This construction gives us very distinet conceptions oſ all the modifications oſ the height oſ a lunar tide, proceeding from the various declinations of the Moon, and the position of the observer; and the height oſ the compound tide may be had by repeating the construction for the Sun, substituting the declination of the Sun for that oſ the Moon, and S for M in the last formula. The two elevations being added together, and  M + S taken from the sum, we have the height required. If it is a spring-tide that ve calculate for, there is scarcely any occasion for two operations, because the Sun cannot then he more than six degrees from the Moon, and the pole of the spheroid will almost coincide with the Moon's placee We may now draw some inferences ſrom this representation. 428. 1. The greatest tides happen when the Moon is in the zenith or nadir of the place oſ observationn For as M approaches to Z, A and I approach to B and D, and when they coincide, F coincides with B, and the height of the superior tide is tenM. The medium tide, however, diminishes by this change, because G comes nearer to O, and consequently H comes also nearer to O, and DH is diminished. If, on the other hand, the place of observation he changed, Z approaching to M, the superior, inferior, and medium tides are all increasedc For, in such case, D separates from I, and DE, DH, and DF are all enlarged. 429. 2. If the Moon be in the equator, the superior and inferior tides are equal, and M X cos.? lat. For then A and I coincide with C; and F and  coalesce in i; and Di / DB x cos.? BDC, /DB x cos.? ZCQQ. 430. 3. If the place of observation be in the equator, the superior and inferior tides are equal every where, and h are/M Xx cos.}, declin. . For B then coincides with C; the points F and K coincide with G; and P Gæ PC X cos.? C PA,/M x cos M CQ. 481. 4. The superior tides are greater or less than the inferior tides, according as Z and M are on the same or on opposite sides of the equator. For, by taking QZ' on the other side of the equator, equal to QZ, and draving Z' Cæ, cutting the small cirele in 3, ve see that the figure is simPly reversedd The magnitudes and proportions of the tides are the same in either case, but the combination is inverted, and what belongs to a superior tide in the one case belongs to an inferior tide in the other. 4389. 5. If the colatitude be equal to the Moons declination, or less than it, there will be no inferior tide, or no superior tide, according as the latitude and Moons declination are of the same or of different denominations. For when P Z / M Q, D coincides with I, and X also coincides with I. Also, vhen PZ is less than M Q, D falls below I, and the point Z never passes through the equator of the watery spheroidc. The low water m m Fig. 50.) observed in the parallel æ m is only a lower part of the same tide æ æ, of which the high water is also observed in the same placee In such situations, the tides are very small, and are subjected to singular varieties, which arise from the Moons change oſ declination and distance. Such tides can be seen only in the circumpolar regions. The inhabitants of Iceland notice a period of nineteen years, in which their tides gradually inerease and diminish, and exhibit very singular phenomena. This is undoubtedly oving to the revolution of the Moons nodes, by which her declination is considerably affected. That island is precisely in the part of the ocean where the effect of this is most remarkable A register kept there would be very instructive; and it is to be hoped that this will be done, as in that sequestrated Thulè there is a zealous astronomer, M. Lievog, furnished with good instruments, to vhom this series oſ observations has been recommended. 488. 6. At the very pole there is no daily tide But there is a gradual rise and subsidence oſ the water twice in a month, by the Moons declining on both sides of the equator. The water is lowest at the pole when the Moon is in the equator, and it rises about twenty-six inches when the Moon is in the tropics Also, when her ascending node ĩs in the vernal equinox, and she has her greatest declination, the water will be thirty inches above its lowest state, by the action of the Moon alone. 484. 7. The medium tide is, as has already been ohserved, M x I4 cos. 2 deol x cos. 2 lat. As the Moons declination never exceeds 300, the cosine of twice her declination is always a positive quantity, and never less than . When the latitude is less than 459, the cosine of twice the latitude is also positive, but negative vhen the latitude exceeds 450. Attending to these circumstances, ve may infer, 485. 1. That the mean tides are equally affected by the northerly and southerly declinations oſ the Moon. 486. 2. Iſ the latitude be exactly 450, the mean fide is always the same, and  3 M. For, in this case, BD ĩs perpendiceular to P C, and the point H always eoncides with O. This is the reason why, on the coasts oſ France and Spain, the tides are so little affected by the declination of the luminaries. 487. 8. When the latitude is less than 450, the mean tides increase as the declination of the Moon diminishes. For cosin. 2 lut. being then a positive quantity, the formula increases hen the cosine oſ the declination oſ the Moon increases, that is, it diminishes when the declination of the Moon increases. As B Q diminishes, G comes nearer to C, and H separates from O towards B, and DH inerenases. But if the latitude exceed 45°, the point H must fall between O and D, and the mean tide will inerease as the declination increnses. 438. 5. If the latitude be/O0, the point H coincides vith G, and the effect of the Moons declination is then the most sensible The mean tide, in this case, is M x I+ cos. 2 declin. õ ; 489. Every ſhing that has been determined here for the Iunar tide may easily be accommodated to the high and low water of the compound tide, by repeating the computations with S in the place of M, as the constant coeſſicient. But, in general, it is almost as exact as the nature of the question will admit, to attend only to the lunar tide. The declination of the real summit of the spheroid, in this case, never diſfers from the declination of the summit oſ the lunar tide more than two degrees, and the correetion may be made at any time by a little reflection on the simultaneous position of the Sun. What has been said is strictly applicable to the spring tides. M F 5tide æ sin.? d O (Fig. 50.) is the quantity to be added to the tide found by the construction. It is exact in spring-tides, and very near the truth in all other cases. , ; S lat. : : The sin.? d Ois=oPVFor sin. d OG: sin. d cos.? decl. ſ G O æ sin. d G: sin. d O. Such, then, are the more simple and general consequences of gravitation on the waters of our ocean, on the supposition that the whole globe is covered with water, and that the ocean always has the form which produces a perfect equilibrium of force in every partiele. 404. But the globe is not so covered, and it is elear that there must be a very great extent oſ open sea, in order to produce that elevation at the summit of the spheroid which corresponds vith the aceumulating ſorce of the luminaries. A quadrant at least of the ellipse is necessary for giving the vwhole tidee With less than this, there ill not be enough of water to make up the spheroid. And, to produee the full daily vicissitude oſ high and low water, this extent oſ sea must be in longitude. An equal extent in latitude may produce the greatest elevation; but it vill not produce the series oſ heights that should occur in the course of a lunar day. In confined seas of small extent, such as the Caspian, the Euxine, the Baltic, and the great lakes in North America, the tides must be almost insensiblee For it is evident that the greatest difference oſ height on the shore of such confined seas can be no more than the deflection from the tangent of the arch of the spheroid contained in that sea This, in the Caspian Sea, cannot exceed seven inches; a quantity so small, that a slight breeze of wind, setting off shore, will be suſficient for preventing the accumulation, and even for producing a depression. A moderate breez, blowing along the canal in St James's Park at London, raises the water two inches at one end, while it depresses it as much at the other. The only confined seas of considerable extent are the Mediterranean and the Red Sea. The first has an extent of 40 in longitude, and the tides there might be very sensible, were it on the equator, but being in lat. 35 nearly, the effects are lessened in the proportion of five to four. In such a situation, the phenomena are very difſerent, both in regard to time and to kind, from what they would be, if the Mediterranean were part of the open ocean. Its surface will be parallel to what it would be in that case, but not the same. This ill appear by inspection of Fig. 51, where m r ꝑ represents the natural level of the ocean, and M o Q represents the watery spheroid, having its pole in M, and its equator at Q;. S 5 may re present a tide post, set up on the shore of Syria, at the east end of the Mediterranean, and G o a post set up at the Gut of Gibraltar, vhich we shall suppose at present to he dammed up. When the Moon is over M, the waters oſ the Mediterranean assume the surface gr s, parallel to the corresponding portion of the elliptical surface Q o M, erossing the natural surface at 7, nearly in the middle oſ its length. Thus, on the Syrian coast, there is a considerable elevation of the waters, and at Gibraltar, there is a considerable depression. In the middle of the length, the water is at its mean height. The water of the Atlantic Ocean, an open and extensive sea, assumes the surſace of the equilibrated spheroid, and it stands considerably higher on the outside of the dam, as is seen by G o, than on the inside, as expressed by G. It is nearly lov water within the Straits, vhile it is about 3 or à flood withoutt. The vater has been ebbing for some hours within the Straits, but flowing ſor great part of the time without. As the Moon moves vestward, tovard Gibraltar, the water will begin to rise, but slowly, within the Straits, but it is flowing very fast without. When the Moon gets to P, things are reversed. The summit of the spheroid (it being supposed a spring- tide) is at P, and it is nearly high water within the Straits, but has heen ebhing for some hours without. It is low water on the coast of Syria. All this while, the water at r, in the middle of the Mediterranean, has not altered its height by any sensible quantity. It Will be high water at one end of the Mediterranean, and low water at the other, vhen the middle is in that part of the general spheroid where the surface makes the most unequal angles with the vertica. This will be nearly in the octants, and therefore about 13 hours before and after the Moons southing (supposing it spring-tide). These observations greatly contribute to the explanation of the singular currents in the Straits of Gibraltar, as they are described by different authorss. For although the Mediterranean is not shut up, and altogether separated ſrom the Atlantic Ocean at Gibraltar, the communication is extremely scanty, and by no means sufficient for allowing the tide of the ocean to diffuse itself into this bason in a regular manmer. Changes of tide, always diſferent, and ſrequently quite opposite, are observed on thẽ east and est side of the narrov neck which conneets the Rock with Spain; and the general tenor oſ those changes has a very great analogy with what has now been described. The tides in the Mediterranean are small, and thereſore easily aſfected by winds But they are remarkably regular. This may be expected. For as the collection or abstraction necessary for producing the change is but small, they are soon accomplished. The registers of the tides at Venice and some other ports in the Adriatic are surprisingly conformable to the theory. S8ee Phil. Trans. vol. LXVII. From this example, it is evident that great deviations may be expected in the ohserved phenomena of the tides ſrom the immediate results of the simple unobstrueted theory, and yet the theory may be ſully adequate to the explanation oſ them, when the circumstances of local situation are properly considered. 405. The real state of things is such, that there are very few parts oſ the ocean where the theory can be applied vithout very great modifications. Perhaps the great Pacific Ocean is the only part oſ the terraqueous globe in which all the ſorces have room to operat. When we consider the terrestrial globe as placed before the acting luminaries, vhich have a relative motion round it ſrom east to vest, and consider the accumulation of the waters as keeping pace vith them on the ocean, ve must see that the tides with vhich we are most familiarly acquainted, namely, those vhich visit the western shores of Europe and Africa, and the eastern shores oſ America, must also be irregular, and be greatly diversiſied by the situation of the coasts. The accumulation on our coasts must be in a great measure supplied by what comes ſrom the Indian and Ethiopic Ocean from the eastward, and what is brought, or kept back, from the South Sea; and the accumulation must be diffused, as ſfrom a collection coming round the Cape of Good Hope, and round Cape Horn. Accordingly, the propagation oſ high water is entirely consonant with such a supposition. It ĩs high water at the Cape of Good Hope about l three o'cloek at new and full moon, and it happens later and later, as ve proceed to the northward along the const of Aſrica; later and later still as we ſollow it along the vest coasts of Spain and France, till we get to the mouth of the English Channel. In short, the high water proceeds along those shores just like the top of a wave, and it may be followed, hour after hour, to the different harbours along the coast. The same wave continues its progress northwards (for it seems to be the only supply), part oſ it going up St Georges Channel, part going northward by the west side oſf Ireland, and a branch of it going up the English Channel, between this island and France What goes up by the east and vest sides oſ Ireland unites, and proceeds still northward, along the western coasts and islands of Scotland, and then diffuses itself to the eastward, toward Norway and Denmark, and, cireling round the eastern coasts of Britain, comes southward, in what is called the German Ocean, till it reaches Dover, where it meets vith the branch which went up the English Channel 406. It is remarkable that this northern tide, aſter having made such a circuit, is more powerful than the branch vhich proceeds up the English Channel. It reaches Dover about a quarter of an hour beſore the southern tide, and forces it backwards for halſ an hour. It must also be remarked, that the tide which comes up channel is not the same vith the tide which meets it from the north, but is a whole tide earlier, iſ not two tides. For the spring-tide at Rye is a tide earlier than the spring-tide at the Nore. It even seems more nearly two tides earlier, appearing the one as often as the other. This may be better seen by tracing the hour of high water ſrom the Lizard up St Georges Channel and along the west coasts oſ Scotland. Now it is very clear that the superior tide at the Orkney islands is simultaneous with the inſerior tide at the mouth oſ the Thames. It is thereſore most probahle that the Orkney tide is al least one tide later than at the Lizard. The whole of this tide is very anomalous, especially aſter getting to the Orkneys. It is a derivative from the great tide of the open sea, which being very distant, is subjected to the influence of hard gales, at a distance, and frequently unlike what is going on upon our coasts. 407. A similar progress oſ the same high water from the southward is observed along the eastern shores oſ South America. But, aſter passing Brazil and Surinam, the AtIantic Ocean becomes so wide that the effeet of this high water, as an adventitious thing supplied from the southward, is not so sensible, because the Atlantie itself is now extensive enough to contribute greatly to the formation of the regular spheroid. But it contributes chiefly by abstraction oſ the waters from the American side, while the aceumulation is forming on the European side oſ the Atlantic. By studying the successive hours oſ high water along the western coasts of Aſrica and Europe, it appears that it takes nearly two days, or between four and five tides, to come from the Cape of Good Hope to the mouth oſ the English Channel. This remark is oſf peculiar importance. 408. Few observations have, as yet, been made public concerning the tides in the Great Pacifie Ocean. They must exhibit phenomena considerably different from what are seen in the Atlantic. The vast stretch of uninterrupted coast from Cape Horn to Cook's Straits, prevents all supply from the eastward for making up the spheroid. So far as we have information, it appears that the tides are very unlike the European tides, till we get 40° or 50 west from the coast oſ America. In the neighbourhood of that coast, there is scarcely any inferior tidee Even in the middle oſ the vast Pacific Ocean the tides are very small, but abundantly regular. 409. The setting of the tides is affected, not only by the form of the shores, but also by the inequalities which undoubtedly obtain in the bottom of the oceann. A deep and long valley there vill give a direetion to the waters which move along it, even although they far overtop the higher paris on each side, just as e observe the wind ſollow the course oſ the valleyss This direction oſ the undermost vaters affects those that flow above them, in consequence of the mutual adhesion of the ſilaments; and thus the whole stream is deflected from the direction which it would have taken, had the ground been even. By such deſlections the path is lengthened, and the time oſ its reaching a certain place is protracted; and this produces other devialions from the caleulations by the simple theory. 446. These peculiarities in the bed or channel also greally affect the height of the tidess. When a wave of a certain magnitude enters a channel, it has a certain quantity ol motion, measured by the quantity of water and iis velocity. If the channel, keeping the same depth, contract in its width, the water, keeping for a while its momentum, must increase its velocity, or its depth, or both. And thus it may happen that, although the greatest elevation produced by the joint action of the Sun and Moon in the open sea does not exceed eight or nine feet, the tide in some singular situations may mount considerably higher. It seems to be owing to this that the high water oſ the Atlantic Ocean, which at St Helena does not exeeed four or five feet, setting in obliquely on the coast of North America, ranges along that coast, in a channel gradually narrowing, till it is stopped in the Bay of Fundy as in a hook, and there it heaps up to an astonishing degree. It sometimes rises 120 ſeet in the harbour oſ Anapolis-Royal. Were it not that we see instances of as strange effects of a sudden check given to ſhe motion of water, ve should be disposed to think that the theory is not adequate to the explanation of the phenomena. But the extreme disparity that we may observe in places very near each other, and which derive their tide from the very same tide in the open sea, must convince us that such anomalies do not impugn the general principle, Vou. III. Z although we should never be able ſully to account for the discrepancy. 447. Nothing causes so much irregularity in the tides as the reflection of the tide from shore ſo shore. Iſa pendulum, vhile vibrating, receives little impulses, at intervals that are always the same, and very nearly equal to its omn vibrations, or even to an aliquot part of them, the vibrations may be inereased to a great magnitude after some time, and then will gradually diminish, and thus have pe riods of increase and decrease. So it happens in the undulation which constitutes a tidee. The situation oſ the coasts may be such, that the time in which this undulation would, of itself, play backward and forward from shore to shore, may be so exactly fitted to the recurring action of the Moon, that the succeeding impulses, alvays added o the natural undulation, may raise it to a height altogether disproportioned to what the action of the Moon can produce in open sea, where the undulation diffuses itself o a vast distanceo. What we see in this way should suſfice for accounting for the great height of the tides on the coasts of continents. Dan. Bernoulli, justly thinking that the obstructions of various kinds to the movements of the ocean should make the tides less than what the unobstrueted forces are able to produce, concluded, from the great tides actually observed, and compared with the tides producible by the Newtonian theory, that this theory was erroneous. He thought it all derived from Newton's erroneous idea oſ the proportion of the two axes of the terraqueous globe; vhich mistake results from the supposition oſ primitive fluidity and uniform density. He investigates the form of the Earth, accommodated to a nucleus of great density, covered with a rarer fluid, and he thinks that he has demonstrated that the height oſ the tide will be in proportion to the comparative density of this nucleus, or the rarity of the fluid. This, says he, alone can account for the tides that we really observe; and which, great as they are, are certainly only a part of what they would be, were they not s0 much obstructed. This is extremely specious, and, coming ſrom an eminent mathematician, has considerable authority. But the problem of the figure of the Earth has been examined with the most scrupulous attention, since the days oſ M. Bernoulli, by the ſirst mathematicians of Europe, who are all perfectly agreed in their deduetions, and confirm that of Sir Isaac Newton. They have also proved, and we apprehend that it is suſficiently established in art. 420. that a denser nucleus, instead of making a greater tide, will make it smaller than if the whole globe be of one densit The ground of Bernoulli's mistake has also been elearly pointed out. There remains no other way of accounting for the great tides but by causes such as have now been mentionedc When the tides in the open Paciſic Ocean never exceed three or four ſeet, ve must be convinced that the extravagant tides observed on the coasts of great continents are anomalies; for there, the obstruetions are certainly greater than in the open se. We must therefore look for an explanation in the motions and collisions of disturbed tidess. These anomalies therefore bring no valid objection agãinst the general theory. 448. There are some situations where it is easy to explain the deviations, and the explanation is instruetive. Suppose a great navigable river, running nearly in a meridional direction, and falling into the sea in a southern coast. The high water of the ocean reaches the mouth of this river (we may suppose) vhen the Sun and Moon are together in the meridian. It is therefore a spring- tide high water at the mouth of the river at noonn. This checks the strenm at the mouth of the river, and causes ĩt to deepen. This again checks the current farther up the river, and it deepens there also, because there is alvays the sume quantity of land water pouring into it. The stream is not perhaps stopped, but only retarded. But this cannot happen vithout its growing deeper. This is propagated farther and farther up the stream, and it is perceived at a great distance up the river. But this requires a considerable time. Our knovledge in hydraulics is too imperſect as yet to enable us to say in what number oſ hours this sensible check, indicated by the smaller velocity, and greater depth, will be propagated to a certain distancee. We may suppose it just a lunar day beſore it arrive at a certain wharf up the riverr. The Moon, at the end of the day, ĩs again on the meridian, as it was when it was a spring- tide at the mouth of the river the day beſoree But, in this interval, there has been another high water at the mouth oſ the river, at the preceding midnight, and there has just been a third high water, about fiſteen minutes before the Moon came to the meridian, and thirty-five minutes after the Sun has passed it. There must have been two low waters in the interval, at the mouth of the river. Now, in the same way that the tide of yesterday noon is propagated up the stream, the tide of midnight has also proceeded upwardss. And thus, there are three coexistent high waters in the river. One of them is a spring-tide, and it is ſar up, at the wharſ above mentionedc The second, or the midnight tide, must be half way up the river, and the third is at the mouth of the river And there must be two low vaters intervening. The low water, that is, a state of the river below its natural level, is produced by the passing low water of the ocean, in the same way that the high water was. For when the ocean ſalls below its natural level at the mouth oſ the river, it occasions a greater declivity oſ the issuing stream of the river. This must augment its velocitythis abstracts more water from the stream above, and that part also sinks below its natural level, and gives a greater declivity to the waters behind it, &e. And thus the stream is accelerated, and the depth is lessened, in succession, in the same way as the opposite eſfects were produced. We have a low vater at different wharſs in succession, just as ve had the high vaters. 449. This state oſ things, which must be ſamiliarly known to all ho have paid any attention to these matters, being seen in almost every river which opens into a tide way, gives us the most distinet notion of the mechanism of the tides. The daily returning tide is nothing but an undulation or wave, excited and maintained by the action of the Sun and Moon. It is a great mistake to imagine that we cannot have high water at London Bridge (for example) unless the water be raised to that level all the way from the mouth of the Thames. In many places that are far from the sea, the stream, at the moment of high water, is down the river, and sometimes it is considerablee At Quebec, it runs downward at least three miles per hour. Thereſore the water is not heaped up to the level; for there is no stream without a declivity. The harbour at Alloa, in the river Forth, is dry at low water, and the bottom is about six feet higher than the highest water-mark on the stone pier at Leith. Yet there are at Alloa tides of twenty, and even twenty-two feet. All Leith would then be under vater, if it stood level from Alloa at the time of high vater there. After considering a tide in this way, any person who has remarked the very strange motions of a tide river, in its various bendings and creeks, and the currents that are frequently observed in a direction opposite to the general stream, ill no longer expeet that the phenomena of the tides will be such as immediately result ſfrom the regular operation of the solar and lunar forces. 450. There is yet another cause of deviation, which is perhaps more dissimilating than any local cireumstances, and the operation of which it is very difficult to state familiarly, and yet precisely. This is the inertia, as it is called, of the waterss. No ſinite change of place or of velocity can be produced in an instant by any accelerating ſorce. Time must elapse before a stone can acquire any measureable velocity by ſalling. Suppose the Earth fluid to the centre, and at rest, without any external disturbing forcee The ocean will form a perfect sphere Let the Moon now act on it. The vaters vill gradually rise immediately under the Moon and in the opposite part of the Earth, sinking all around the equator of the spheroid. Each particle proceeds to its ultimate situation with an accelerated motion, because, till then, the disturbing force exceeds the tendency of the water to subside. Therefore, vhen the form is attained which balances those forces, the motion does not stop, just as a pendulum does not stop when it reaches the lowest point of ĩts arch of vibration. Suppose that the Moon ceases to act at this instant. The motion will still go on, and the ocean vill overpass the halanced figure, but with a retarded motion, as the pendulum rises on the other side of the perpendicular. It will stop at a certain form, when all the former acceleration is done away by the tendency of the water to subside. It now begins to subside at the poles of the spheroid, and to rise at the equator, and after a certain time, it becomes a perſect sphere, that is, the ocean has its natural figure But it passes this figure as far on the other side, and makes a flood vhere there was formerly an ebb; and it would now oscillate ſor ever, alternately swelling and contracting at the points of syzigy and quadrature. If the Moon do not cease to act, as was just now supposed, there vill still be oscillations, but somewhat different from those nov mentionedc The middle form, on both sides of which it oscillates in this case, is not the perſect sphere, but the balanced spheroid. 451. All this is on the supposition that there is no obstructionn. But the mutual adhesion oſ the filaments of vater vill greatly check all these motions. The figure vill not be so soon formed; it ill not be so far overpassed in the ſirst oscillation; the second oscillation will be less than the first, the third will be less than the second, and they vill 500n become insensible. 5 But if it were possible to provide a recurring ſorce, which should tend to raise the waters where they are already rising, and depress them where they are subsiding, and that would always renew those actions in the proper time, it ĩs plain that this force may be such as ill just balance the obstructions competent to any particular degree oſ oscillation. Such a recurring force would just maintain this degree of oillation. Or the recurring force may be greater than this It will therefore increase the oscillations, till the obstructions are also so much increased that the force is balanced by them. Or it may be less than what will balance the obstructions to the degree oſ oscillation excited. In this case the oscillation will decrease, till its obstruetions are no more than vhat this force will balance. Or this recurring force may come at improper intervals, sometimes tending to raise the waters when they are subsiding in the course of an oxillation, and depressing them when they are rising. Such a forcæ must check and greatly derange the oscillations; destroying them altogether, and creating new ones, which it ill increase for some time, and then check and destroy them; and vill do this again and again. Now there is such a recurring force:. As the Earth turns round its axis, suppose the form oſ the halanced spheroid attained in the place immediately under the Moon. This elevation or pole is carried to the eastward by the Earth, suppose into the position D OB (Fig. 58.), the Moon being in the line OM. The pole of the watery spheroid is no longer under the Moon. The Moon vill thereſore act on it so as to change its figure, making it subside in the remote quadrant Bb C, and rise a little in the quadrant Ba A. Thus its pole will come a little nearer to the lIine OM. It is plain, that if B is carried farther eastward, but within certain limits, the situation of the particles will be still more unsuitable to the lunar disturbing foree, and its action on each to change its position will be greater. The action upon them all will therefore make a more rapid change in the position of the pole oſ the displaced spheroid. Tt seems not impossible that this pole may be just so far eastthat the changing forces may be able to cause its pole to shiſt its position fifteen miles in one minute. If this be the case, the pole of the spheroi ũll keep precisely at its present distance ſrom the line OM. For, since it would shift to the westward fifteen miles in one minute by the action of the Moon, and is carried fiſteen miles to the eastward in that time by the rotation oſ the Earth, the one motion just undoes the effeet of the other. The pole of the watery spheroid is really made to shiſt fifteen miles to the westward on the surface of the Earth, and arrives at a place fiſteen miles west of its former place on the globe; but this place of arrival is carried ſifteen miles to the eastward; it is therefore as ſar from the line OM as beſore. l This may be illustrated by a very simple experiment, vhere the operation of the acting forces is really very like that of the lunar disturbing forcee Suppose a chain or flexible rope A B CE DF laid over a pulley, and hanging down in a bight, which is a catenarean curve, having the vertical line O D ſor its axis, and D for its lowest point, which the geometers call its vertex. Let the pulley be turned very slowly round its axis, in the direction A B C. The side C E vill descend, and F A will be taken up, every link of the chain moving in the curve CE D F A. Every link is in the vertex D in ĩts turn, just as every portion of the ocean is in the vertex or pole of the spheroid in iĩts tum. Nov let the pulley turn round very briskly. The chain vill be observed to alter its figure and position. OD vill no longer be its axis, nor D its vertex. It will now forma curve Ce dfA, lying to the leſt hand of CE DF A. Od vill be its new axis, and d will be its vertex. Gravity acis in lines parallel to OD. The motions in the direction CE and FA nearly balance each other. But there is a general motion of every link of the hanging chain, by which it is carried from E towards F. Did the chain continue in the former catenarea, this foree could not be balanced. It therefore keeps so much awry, in the form Ce d A, that its tendency by gravity to return to its former position is just equal to the sum of all the motions in the links from E towards F. And it will shew this tendency by returning to that position, the moment that the pulley gives over turningg. The more rapidly we turn the pulley round, the farther will the chain go aside before its attitude become permanent. 452. It surpasses our mathematical knowledge to say with precision how far eastward the pole of the tide must be from the line of the Moon's direction, even in the simple case which we have been considering. The real state of things is far more complicated. The Earth is not fluid to the centre, but is a solid nucleus, on which flows an ocean of very small depth. In the former case, a very moderate motion of each particle of water is sufficient for making the accumulation in one place, and the depression in another. The particles do little more than rise or subside vertically. But, in the case of a nucleus covered with an ocean of small depth, a considerable horizontal motion is required for bringing together the quantity of water wanted to make up the balanced spheroid. The obetruetions to such motion must be great, both such as arise from the mutual adhesion of the filaments of water, and many that must arise ſrom friction and the inequalities of the bottom, and the configuration of the shores. In some places, the force of the acting luminaries may be able to cause the pole of the spheroid to shiſt its situation as fast as the surface moves away, when the angle M O B is 20 In other places, this may not be till it is 259, and in another, 15 may be enough; but, in every situation, there will be an arrangement that will produce this permanent position of the summit. For when the obstructions are great, the balanced form will not be nearly attained; and when this is the ease, the change pro- ducible on the position of a particle is more rapidly efſected, the forces being great, or rather the resistance arising ſrom gravity alone heing small 453. The consequence oſ all this must be, in the first place, that that form which the ocean would ultimately as sume, did the Earth not turn round its axis, will never be attainedc As the waters approach to that form, they are carried eastward, into situations where the disturhing forces tend to depress them on one side, while they raise them on the other, causing a westerly undulation, vhich keeps its summit at nearly the same distance ſrom the line of the acting luminarys direction. This westerly motion of the summit of the undulation does not necessarily suppos a real transſerence of the water to the westward at the same rate. It is more like the motion of ordinary waves, in vwhich we see a bit of wood or other light body merely rise and fall without any sensible motion in the direction of the wave. In no case whatever is the horizontal motion of the water nearly equal to the moſion of the summit of the vave. It resembles an ordinary wave also in this, that the rate at which the summit of the undulation advances in any direction is very little affected by the height of the wave. Our knowledge, however, in hydraulics has not yet enabled us to say with precision what is the relation between the height of the undulation and the rate of its advance. 454. Thus then it appears, in general, that the summit of the tide must always be to the eastward of the place assigned to it hy our simple theory, and that experience alone can tell us how much. Experience is more uniſorm in this respect than one should expeet. For it is a matter oſ almost universal experience that it is very nearly 19 or 20 degrees. In a few places it is less, and in many it is 5, or ſ, or7 degrees more. This is inferred from observing that the greatest and the smallest of all the tides do not happen on the very time of the syigies and quadratures, but the third, and in some places, the fourth tide aſter. S ubsequent observation has shewn that this is not peculiar to the spring and neap-tides, but obtains in al. At Brest (for example) the tide which bears the mark of the augmentation arising from the Moon's proximity is not the tide seen while the Moon is in perigeo, but the third aſter. In short, the whole series oſf monthly tides disagree with the simultaneous position of the luminaries, but correspond most regularly with their positions 37 or 38 hours before. 455. Another observation proper ſor this place is, that as different extent of sea, and different depth of water, will and do occasion a difſerence in the time in which a great undulation may be propagated along it, it may happen that this time may so correspond with the repetition of all the agitating forces, that the action of to-day may so conspire with the remaining undulation of yesterday as to inerease it by its reiterated impulses, to a degree vastly greater than its original quantity. By giving gentle impulses in this way to a pendulum, in the direction of its motion, its vibrations may be inereased to fifty times their first size. It is not necessary, for this effect, that the return of the luminary into the favourable situation be just at the interval of the undulation. It will do if it conspire with every second or third or fourth undulation; or, in general, if the amount of its conspiring actions exceeds considerably, and at no great distance of time, the amount of its opposing actions. In many cases, this co-operation will produce periods of augmentation and diminution, and many seeming anomalies, which may greatly vary the phenomena. 456. A third observation that should be made here is, that as the obstruetions to the motion of the ocean arising from the mutual adhesion and action of the filaments are known to be so very great, we have reason to helieve that the change oſ form actually produced is but a moderate part of what the force can ultimately produee, and that none of the oscillations are often repeated. It ĩs not pro- bable that the repetitions of the great undulations can mueh exceed four or fivee When experiments are made on still water, we rarely see a pure undulation repeated so often Even in a syphon oſ glass, where all diffusions oſ the undulating power is prevented, they are rarely sensible after the fifth or sixth. A gentle smooth undulation on the surface oſ a very shallow bason, in the view of agitating the whole depth, will seldom be repeated thricee This is the form which most resembles a tide. 457. Aſter this account of the many causes oſ deviation from the motions assigned by our theory, many oſ which are local, and reducible to no rule, it vould seem that this theory, which we have taken so much pains to establish, is of no use, except that of giving us a general and most poverſul argument for the universal gravitation oſ matter. But this would be too hasty a conclusionn. We shall find that a judicious consideration of the different classes oſ the phenomena of the tides vill suggest such relations among them, that, by properly combining them, we shall not only perceive a very satisfactory agreement with the theory, but shall also be able to deduce some important practical inferences from it. 458. Each of the different modifications of a tide has its own period, and its peculiar magnitudee Where the change made by the acting force is but small, and the time in which it is effected is considerable, ve may look for a considerable conformity with the theory: but, on the other hand, if the change to hbe produced on the tide is very great, and the time allowed to the forces for effecting it is small, it is equally reasonable to expeet sensible deviations. If this consideration be judiciously applied, we shall find a very satisſactory conformity. 459. Of all the modiſications of a tide, the greatest, and the most rapidly effected, is the difference between the superior and inferior tides of the same day When the Moon has great declination, the superior tide at Brest may he three times greater than the sueceeding or inferior tide. But the ſact is, that they differ very little M. de la Place says that they do not difſer at al. We cannot ſind out his authority. Having examined with the most serupulous attention more than 200 of the observations at Brest, and Rochefort, and Port L'Orient, and made the proper allowance for the distances of the Iuminaries, ve can say with confidence, that this general assertion of M. de La Place is not founded on the observations that have been published; and it does not agree with what is observed in the other ports of Europe. There is always observed a diſference, agreeing with theory in the proportions, and in the order of their succession, although much smaller. A very slight consideration vill give us the reason oſ the observed diserepancy. It is not possible to make two immediately succeeding undulations oſ inert water remarkably diſferent from each other. The great undulation, in retiring, causes the water to heap up to a greater height in the oſfing; and this, in diffusing itself, must make the next undulation greater on the shoree That this is the true actount of the matter, is fully proved by observing, that when the theoretic difference between those two tides is very small, it is as distinetly observed in the harbours as when it is great. This is clearly seen in the Brest observations. 460. The absolute magnitudes of the tides are greatly modiſied by local circumstances. In some harbours there is but a small difſerence between the spring and neap-lides, and in other harbours it is very great. But, in either case, the small daily changes are observed to follow the proportion required by the theory with abundant precision. Counted half vay ſrom the spring to the neap-tides, the hourly ſall of the tide is as the square of the time from springtide, except so far as this may be changed by the position of the moons perigee. In like manner, the hourly increase of the tides aſter neap-tide is observed to be as the squares of the time from neap- tide. 6 461. The priming and lagging of the tides corresponds vith the theory with such accuracy, that they seem to he calculated from it, independent of observatio. There is nothing that seems less likely to be deranged than this. Tides which differ very little from each other, either as to magnitude or time, should be expected to follow one another just as the forces requiree There is indeed a deviation, very general, and easily accounted for. There is a small acceleration of the tides from spring- tide to neap-tide. This is undoubtedly owing to the obstruetionss A smaller tide being less able to overcome them, is sooner brought to its maximum. The deviation, however, is very small, not exceeding  of an hour, by which the neap-tide anticipates the theoretical time of its accomplishment. It would mther appear at ſirst sight that a small tide would take a longer time of going up a river than a great one. And iĩt may be so, although it be sooner high water, because the deſaleation from its height may sooner terminate its risingThere is no diſference observed in this respeet, vhen we compare thè times of high vwater at London Bridge and at the Buoy of the Nore. They happen at the very same time at both places, and therefore the spring-tides and the neap-tides employ the same time in going up the river Thames. 462. This agreement of observation with theory is most fortunate; and indeed without it, it would scarcely have been possible to make any practical use of the theory. But nov, iſ we note the exact time of the high water of springtide for any harbour, and the exact position of the Sun and Moon at that time, ve can easily make a table of the monthly series for that port, by noticing the difference of that time from our table, and making the same differenee for every succeeding phasis of the tide. 463. But, in thus accommodating the theoretical series to any particular place, ve must avoid a mistake commonly made by the composers oſ tide- tabless. They give the hour oſ high vater at ſull and change of the Moon, and this is considered as spring-tidee But perhaps there is no part in the world where that is the case. It is usually the third tide after full or change that is the greatest oſ all; and the third tide aſter quadrature is, in most places, the smallest tidee Now it is with the greatest tide that our monthly series commencess. Thereſore, it is the hour of this tide that is to be taken for the hour oſ the harbour. But, as winds, freshes, and other causes, may aſfect any individual tide, ve must take the medium of many observations; and we must take care that we do not consider as a spring-tide one which is indeed the greatest, but chances to be enlarged by being a perigean tide. When these precautions are taken, and the tides of one monthly series marked, by applying the same correction to the hours in the third column of Bernoullis table I.), iĩt vill be found to correspond with observation with sufficient accuracy for all purposes. In making the eomparison, it vill be proper to take the medium between the superior and inferior tides of each day, both with respect to time and height, because the difference in these respects between those two tides never entirely disappears. 464. The series of changes which depend on the change of the Moons declination are of more intrieate comparison, because they are so much implicated with the changes depending on her distancee But when freed as much as pos sible from this complication, and then estimated by the medium bhetween the superior and inferior tide oſ the same day, they agree extremely well with the theoretical series. This, by the way, enables us to account for an observation which would otherwise appear mconsistent with the theory, which aſfirms that the superior tide is greatest when the Moon is in the zenith (392.) The observation is, that on the coasts oſ France and Spnin the tides increase as the Moon is nearer to the equatorr But it was shewn in the same article, that in latitudes below 45, the medium tide increases as the Moons declination diminishes. Beruoulli justly observes, that the tides with which we are most ſamiliarly acquainted, and ſrom which we form all our rules, must be considered as derived from the more perfect and regular tide formed in the widest part of the Atlantic ocean. Extensive, however, as this may be, it is too narrow for a complete quadrant of the spheroid. Thereſore it will groW more and more perſect as its pole advances to the middle of the ocean; and the changes which happen on the bounding coasts, from which the waters are drawn on all sides to make it up, must be vastly more irregular, and vill have but a partial resemblance to it. They will, however, resemble it in its chief ſeaturess This tide being ſormed in a considerable southern latitude, it becomes the more certain that the medium tide will diminish as the Moons declination increasess But although this seeming objection occurs on the French coasts, it is by no means the case on ours, or more to the north. We always observe the superior tide to exceed the inferior, if the Moon have north declination. The same agreement with theory is observable in the solar tides, or in the effect of the Suns declination. This indeed is much smaller, but is observed by reason of its regularity. For although it is also complicated with the effects oſ the Suns change of distance, this effeet having the same period with his declination, one equation may comprehend them both. M. Bernoulli's observation, just mentioned, tends to account for a very general opinion, that the greatest tides are in the equinoxes. I observe, however, that this opinion is far ſrom being well established. Both Sturmy and Colepress speak of it as quite uncertain, and Wallis and Flamstead reject it. It is agreed on all hands, that our winter tides exceed the summer tides. This is thought to confirm that point of the theory which makes the Suns accumulating force greater as his distance diminishess I am doubtful of the applicability oſf this principle, because the approach of the Sun causes the Moon to recede, and her recess is in the triplicate ratio of the Sun's approach. Her accumulating foree is therefore diminished in the sesquiplicate ratio of the Suns approach, and her influence on the phenomena of the tides exceeds the Sun's. 465. The changes arising from the Moon's change of distance are more considerable than those arising from her change of declination. By reason of their implication with those changes, the comparison becomes more diſficult. M. Bernoulli did not find it so satisſactory They are, in general, much less than theory requires. This is probably owing to the mutual effects of undulations which should differ very considerably, but follow each other too closely. In M. de la Place's vay of considering the phenomena (to be mentioned aſterwards) the diminution in magnitude is very accountable, and, in other respeets, the correspondence is greatly improvedl. When the Moon changes either in perigeo or apogeo, the series is considerably deranged, because the next spring-tide is formed in opposite circumstances. The derangement is still greater, when the Moon is in perigee or apogee in the quadraturess The two adjoining spring-tides should be regular, and the two neap-tides extremely unequal. 466. We shall first consider the changes produced on the times of full sea, and then the changes in the height. M. Bernoulli has computed a table for both the perigean and apogean distance of the Moon, ſrom which it will appear what correction must be made on the regular series. It is computed precisely in the same way as the former, the only difference being in the magnitude oſ M and S, and we may imitate it by a construction similar to Fig. 49. To make this table of easier use, M. Bernoulli introduces the important observation, that the greatest tide is not, in any part of the world, the tide which happens on the day of new or ſull Moon, nor even the first or the second tide Vou. III. 2A aſter; and that with respect to the Atlantic Ocean, and all its coasts, it is very precisely the third tidee So that should we have high water in any port precisely at noon on the full or change of the Moon, and on the first day oſ the month, the greatest tide happens at midnight on the second day of the month, or, expressing it in the common vay, it is the tide which happens when the Moon is a day and a half old. The summit of the spheroid is thereſore 19 or 20 degrees to the eastward of the Sun and Moon. At this distance, the tendency of the accumulating forces of the Sun and Moon to complete the spheroid, and o bring its pole precisely under them, is just balanced by the tendency of the waters to subsidee Thereſore it is raised no higher, nor can it come nearer to the Sun and Moon, because then the obliquity oſ the force is diminished, on which the changing power dependss That this is the true cause, appears from this, that it is, in like manner, on the third tide that all the changes are perceived which correspond to the declination of the Moon, or her distance from the Earth. Every thing falls out, thereſore, as if the luminaries vere 19 or 20 degrees eastward of where they are, having the pole of the spheroid in its theoretical situation with respeet to this fſietitious situation of the luminaries. But, in such a case, were the Sun and Moon 2qQ farther eastward, they would pass the meridian S80 minutes, or one hour and 20 minutes later. Therefore I 20 is added to the hours oſ high water of the ſormer table, calculated for the mean distance of the Moon from the Earth. Thus, on the day of nev Moon, we have not the springtide, but the third tide before it, that is, the tide which should happen when the Moon is 200 west of the Sun, or has the elongation 160°. This tide, in our former table, happens at II' 02. Therefore add to this I' 20, and ve have 0 2 ſor the hour of high water on the day of full and change for a harbour which would otherwise have high water when the Sun and Moon are on the meridian. In this way, by adding I' 20 to the hours of high water in the ſormer table, for a position of the luminaries 200 farther west, it is accommodated to the observed elongation of the Moon, this elongation being always supposed to be that of the Moon when she is on the meridian. Such, then, is the ſollowing table of M. Bernoull. The first column gives the Moons elongation from the Sun, or from the opposite point of the heavens, the Moon being then on the meridian. The second column gives the hour of high water vhen the Moon is in perigeo. The third column (hich is the same with the ſormer table, with the addition of I' 20) gives the hour oſ high water when the Moon is at her mean distancee And the fourth column gives the hour when she is apogeo. TABLE II. : 2.45] ⸗ 3.90 æ 8.55 4.383 æ l519] g liot 6.15 g la5 120  720 J 8.95  881 B 213 9203] 9.804 F 8317 83 ſ10. 63 10.18 17 38 10.873 ]10.45 ſl0O56 2 375 118 ſ11.20 ſlL.30 æ 38⸗ 170 11.45 11.51 11.593 F 260ẽ 18918 a2 æ7; 7 I8lẽ 467. This table, though of considerable service, being ſar preferable to the usual tide tables, may sometimes deviate a few minutes from the truth, beeause it is calculated on the supposition oſ the luminaries being in the equator. But when they have considerable declination, the horary arch of the equator may differ two or three degrees ſrom the elongation. But all this error will be avoided by reckoning the high water ſrom the time of the Moons southing, which is always given in our almanackss This interval being always very small (never 129), the error will be insensiblee. For this reason, the three other columns are added, expressing the priming of the tides on the Moons southing. To accommodate this table to all the changes of the Moon's declination would require more calculation than all the restt. We shall come near enough to the truth, if ve lessen the minutes in three hour-columns 5 vhen the Moon is in the equator, and increase them as much when she is in the tropic, and if we use them as they stand vhen she is in a middle situation. 468. All that remains now, is to adjust this general table to the peculiar situation of the portt. Therefore, colleet a great number of observations of the hour of high water at ſull or change of the Moon. In making this collection, note particularly the hour on those days where the Moon is new or full precisely at noon; for this is the circumstance necessary for the truth of the elongations in the first column of the table A small equation is necessary for correcting the observed hour of high water, when the syzigy is not at noon, because, in this situation of the luminaries, the tide lags 35 behind the Sun in a day, as has been already shewn. Suppose the lagging to be 86', this vill make the equation I4 minute for every hour that the full or change has happened before or after the noon of that day This correction must be added to the observed hour of high water, if the syzigy was before noon, and sub- tracted, iſ it happened aſter noon. Or, if we choose to refer the time of high water to the Moons southing, which, in general, is the best method, ve must add a minute to the time between high sea and the Moons southing for every hour and half that the syzigy is beſore noon, and subtract it iſ the syrigy has happened after noon. For the tides prime 15 in 24 hours. 469. Having thus obtained the medium hour oſ high water at full and change of the Moon, note the difference of it from O 29, and then make a table peculiar to that port, by adding that diſference to all the numbers of the columns. The numbers of this table will give the hour of high water corresponding to the Moons elongation for any other time. It will, however, always be more exact to refer the time to the Moons southing, for the reasons already given. By means of a table so constructed, the time of high water for the port, in any day of the lunation, may be depended on to less than a quarter of an hour, except the course of the tides be disturbed by winds or ſreshes, which admit of no calculation. It might be brought nearer by a much more intricate caleulation; but this is altogether unnecessary, on account of the irregularities arising from those causes. It is not s0 easy to state, in a series, the variations which happen in the height of the tides by the Moons change of distance, although they are greater than the variations in the times oſ high water. This is partly owing to the great differences which obtain in different ports between the greatest and smallest tides, and partly ſrom the difficulty of expressing the variations in such a manner as to be easily understood by those not familiar with mathematical computationss. M. Bernoulli, vhom we have followed in àll the practical inferences from the physical theory, imagines, that, notwithstanding the great disproportion between the spring and neap tides in different places, and the diſ- ferences in the absolute magnitudes of both, the middle between the highest and lowest daily variations will proceed in very nearly the same way as in theory. Instead, thereſore, of taking the values of M and S, as already established, he takes the height of spring and neap tides in any port as indicative of M 4 S and M S ſor that port Calling the spring- tide A, and the neap-tide B, this principle ill give us M / AL, and s2 F these values o M and S he computes their apogean and perigean values, and then constructs columns of the height of the tides, apogean and perigean, in the same manner as the column already computed for the mean distance of the Moon, that is, computing the parts m f and a f (Fig. 49.) of the whole tide m a separately The same may be done vith incomparably less trouble by our construction (Fig. A+B AB , and S ã Although this is undoubtedly an approximation, and perhaps all the accuracy that is attainable, it is not founded on exact physical principles The local proportion of A t0 B depends on circumstances peculiar to the place; and we have no assurance that the changes of the lunar force will operate in the same manner and proportion on these two quantities, however differentt. We are certain that it will not; otherwise the proportion of spring and neap tides would be the same in all harbours, however much the springs may differ in different harbours. I compared Bernoulli's apogean and perigean tides, in about twenty instances, selected ſrom the observations at Brest and St Malo, vhere the absolute quantities differ very videly. I was surprised, but not convinced, by the agreement. IT am however persuaded, that the table is of great use, and have thereſore inserted it, as a model by which a table may easily be computed ſor any harbour, employing the spring-tide and neap-tide heights observed in that har49.) and the values M / bour as the A and B ſor that placee The table is, like the last, accommodated to the easterly deviation of the pole of the spheroid from its theoretical place. It appears, from this table, and also from the last, that the neap-tides are much more affected by the inequalities of the ſorces than the spring-tides aree The neap-tides vary from 70 to 128, and the springs from 90 to I4. The first is almost doubled, the last is augmented but à. 470. The attentive reader cannot but observe, that all the tables of this monthly construction must be very im- perſect, although their numbers are perfectly accurate, because, in the course of a month, the declination and distance of the Moon vary, independently of each other, through all their possible magnitudes. The last table is the only one that is immediately applicable, by interpolation. It would require several tables of the same extent, to give us a set of equations, to be applied to the original table oſ art. 418; and the computation would become as troublesome for this approximation as the calculation of the exact value, taking in every circumstance that can affect the question. For that caleulation requires only the computation of two right-angled spherical triangles, preparatory to the ealeulation of the place of high water. But, with all these imperfections, M. Bernoulli's second table is much more exact than any tide- table yet published. Such, on the whole, is the information furnished by the doctrine oſ universal gravitation concerning this curious and important phenomenon. It is undoubtedly the most irreſragable argument that we have for the truth and universality of this doctrine, and, at the same time, for the simplicity of the whole constitution of the solar system, 5 far as it can be considered mechanically. No new principle is required ſor an operation of nature so unlike all the other phenomena in the system. 471. The method which I have followed in the investigation is nearly the same with that of its illustrious dicovererr. We have contented ourselves with shewing vorious serieses of phenomena, which tally so well with the legitimate consequences of the theory, that the real souree of them can no longer be doubted. And, not withstanding the various deviations from those consequences, arising ſrom other circumstances, ve have obtained practical rules, which make the mariner pretty well acquainted with the general course of the tides, sufficiently to put him on his guard against the dangers he runs by grossly mistaking them, and even enabling him to take advantage oſf the course of the tide for prosecuting his voyage. Still, however, a great store of local inſormation is necessary. For there are some parts of the ocean, where the tides follow an order extremely unlike hat ve have describedl. The bar of Tonquin in China is one oſ the most remarkable; and iĩts chieſ peculiarity consists in its having but one tide in each lunar day. It has been traced to the eo-operation of two great tides, coming from opposite quarters, with almost six hours of diſference in the time oſ high water. The result oſ which is, that the compound tide is the excess of the one above the other, forming a high water when the sum of both their elevations is a maximum. Dr Halley has given a very distinct explanation of this tide in No 162 of the Philosophical Transactions. 472. A very diſferent method of investigating this and a similar phenomenon has been employed by the eminent mathematicians, D Alembert and La Place, in which M. La Place, vho makes this a chief article of his Mechanique Celeste, deduces the whole directly ſfrom the interior mechanism of hydrostatical undulations. His main inferences perfectly agree with those already delivered. The method of Newton and Bernoulli has been preferred here, because by this means the connexion with the operation of universal gravitation is much better kept in sight. At the same time, La Places method allows us, in some cases, to state the individual fact more nearly as it occurs, without considering it as the modification of another fact that is more general. But it may be doubted, whether La Place has explained all the variety of phenomena. His whole application is limited by the data which furnish the arbitrary quantities in his equations. These being wholly taken from the observations in the ports of France and Spain, it may be questioned whether the sameness, arising from the hatitude being s0 near 45°, may not have made the inge- nious author simplify too much his theory He considers every class of phenomena as operations completely acoomplished, and the ocean at the end of the action of any one of the ſorces as in a state of indiſference, ready ſor the ſrææ operation of the next. For example, the equality of the superior and inferior tides of one day is deduced by La Place immediately from the circumstance of the ocæan being of nearly an uniform depth, saying that the small inferior tide is not affected by the greatness of the preceding superior tide, because the obstructions are such, that all motions cease very soon, almost immediately aſter the force has ceased to actt. We doubt the truth of the near uniformity of the sea's depth. The unequal tides are confessedly most remarkable on the coasts, where the depth is the most unequal. The other principle, that the effects of primitive motions are all obliterated, and therefore every tide is the completed operation of the present force, is still more questionablee It is well known, that the roll oſ a great storm in the Bay of Biscay is very sensible indeed for three days. Of this we have had repeated experience. The superſicial agitation of a storm (for it is no more) is nothing in comparison with the huge uniform momentum of a tide; and the greatest storm, even while it blows, cannot raise the tide three feet; nor does it even then change what we have called the tide, the diſference between high and low water; it raises or keeps down both nearly alike. Besides, how will M. La Place account for the undeniable duration of every tide-wave on the coasts of Europe and America for a day and a half? There can be no question about this, because the course of the tides during a month is precisely conformable to itt. The tide which bears the mark of the perigean tide is not the tide which happens when the Moon is in perigeo, but the third following that tide, just as in the springs and neaps. In like manner, it is observed at Brest, without one exception ſor six years, that the morning or superior tide at new Moon is smaller than the inferior tide in summer. In vinter it is the contrary, not, however, with such constant accuracy Nov, it should be just the contrary, if the tides observed were the tides corresponding with the then state of the ſorces. But they are not. They are tides corresponding with the state oſ the forces thirty-six hours before (8ee Mem. Acad. Par. 1720, p. 206, duodecimo.) It is the same at full Moon, that is, the morning tide in summer is less than the evening tide The morning tide corresponding to the then state of the forces is what we have called an inferior tide, the Moon being then under the horizon, with south declination. The tide, therefore, should be greater than the subsequent or evening, or superior tidee But, like the last example, it is the tide corresponding to the forces in action thirty-six hours beforee Can we now deny that the present state of the vaters is aſſected by the action oſ ſorces which have ceased thirty-six hours ago ? and if this be granted, it is impossible that two tides immediately sueceeding can be very unequal. The contrary can be shewn in an experiment perfectly resembling the great tides of the ocean. An apparatus, made for exhibiting the appearance oſ a reciprocating spring, was so constructed, that one of its runnings was very sudden and copious, and the next was moderate and slow. It emptied into a small basin, which communicated with a long and narrow horizontal channel, shut at the far end, the basin emptying itself by a small spout on the opposite sidee Thus, two very unequal floods and ebbs presented themselves at the mouth of this channel, and sent a wave along it, which, at the first, was very unequal. But when it was mixed with the returning wave from the far end, they were soon brought to an apparent equality. The experiment appearing curious, it was prosecuted, by various changes of the apparatus; and several eſfects tended very mueh to explain some of the more singular appearances oſ the tides. There is an example oſ the contimuance oſ former impressions in the tides among the western islands of Scotland, that considerably resembles the tide on the bar of Tonquinn The general course of the flood round the little island of Berneray is N. E. and that of the ebb is S.W. But at a certain time in the spring, both flood and ebb run N. E. during twelve hours, and the next flood and ebb run S. W. The contrary happens in autumn. Yet in the oſing, the flood and ebb hold their regular courses. This greatly resembles the tide at Tonquin, and also the Grecian Euripus. 473. The reader vill recollect that we stated, as our opinion, that, in consequence of the inertia oſf the waters, the pole of the ocean is always to the eastward of its theoretical placee For which reason, the figure actually attained by the ocean is not a figure oſ equilibration Did the Earth stand still, it would soon be brought to its proper position, and completed to its due form. Thereſore, there is always a motion towards this completion; and this motion is obstructed. Hence we apprehend, that there must be a perpetual current of the waters, especially in the tropical regions, from east to westt. We cannot see how this can be avoided; and ve think that it is established as a matter of nautical observation. In regard to the Atlantic, this seems to be a general opinion of the navigators. There are two very excellent journals of voyages from Stockholm to China, by Captain Eckhart, in vwhich there is a very frequent comparison of the ships reckoning with lunar observations and the arrivals on known coasts, from which we cannot help inferring the same general current in the Indian and Ethiopic seas. It seems, therefore, to obtain over the wholee The part oſ this current which diffuses itself into the Atlantic is but small, it having a freer passage straight forward. But the part thus diffused produces the gulf stream, in its way along the American coasts, and escapes round the north capes oſ Europe and America. In all probability, a south- erly current may he observed in the straits which separate America ſrom the Asiatic continent. The whole amount of this motion cannot be considerable, but there must be sme, if there be to circumpolar communieations between the great eastern and western divisions of the ocean. Without this, it must be reduced to a reciprocating motion too intricate for investigation. 474. There is another circumstanee which seems to strengthen our confidence in the reality oſ this westerly current of the ocean. The gravity of the waters being more diminished in conjunction and opposition than it is augmented in quadrature with the acting luminary, each particle tends to recede from the centre, and to describe a larger circle, employing a longer time. Here is a tendency or nisus to a relative motion westerly. Water, being almost perfeetly fluid, will obey this tendency, and in time acquire such a motion, were it not obstrueted by solid obstacles. But some effect must remain, too intrieate to admit any calculation, and perhaps not ultimately sensible. 415. If the height of the atmosphere be equal to the radius of the Earth, we shall have a tide in the air double of that in the ocean. When all the affecting circumstances are considered, it appears that an ebb and flood of the atmosphere may differ in elevation about 120 feet. This might be sensible by affecting the barometer. True, the gravity of the mereury is also diminished, but not so much as that of the more distant air. But the height of the atmosphere is too small to give rise to any such tides. They cannot sensibly exceed those of the ocean, and this cannot change the height of the mercury in the barometer , 3, of an inch. Professor Toaldo at Padua kept a register of the barometer for more than thirty yearss He has added into one sum all the mercurial heights observed at nev Moon. Another sum vas made of all the heights observed in the quadratures; another of the perigean; and another of the apogean heights, &e. &e. He thinks that differences were observed in those sums suſficient for proving the accumulation and compression of the air by its unequal gravitation to the Moon. Thus the apogean heights exceeded the perigean by I4 inchess. The heights in syzigy exceeded those in quadrature by II inches. (8ee Mem. Berlin, I7T, and a book expressly on the subject.) But there is another effect of this disturbing force which may be much more sensible, namely, the general westerly current of the airr. M. D'Alembert has investigated this with great care, and singular address, and has proved that there must be a westerly current in the tropical regions, at the rate of eight feet nearly in a second. This is a very adequate cause of the trade winds which are observed between the tropiess It is indeed increased by the rarefaction of the air occasioned by the heat oſ the Sun, which expands the air heated by the ground, and it is both raised and diffused latterl. When the Sun has passed the meridian a proper number of degrees, the air must now cool, and in cooling contract behind the Sun. Air from the east comes in greater abundance than from any other quarter to supply the vacancy. 476. The disk of Jupiter, vhen viewed through a good telescope, is distinguishable into zones, like a bit of striped satin. These zones, or belts, are of changeable breadth and position, but all parallel to his equator. Therefore they are not attached to his surface, but float on it, as clouds float on our atmospheree. This Earth will have somewhat of this appearance, if viewed ſfrom the Moon; for each elimate has a state of the sky peculiar in some degree to itself in this respect, and there must be a sort of sameness in one climate all round the globe. A series of observations on a particular spot of Jupiter's surface demonstrate his rotation in 9 56'. Spots have been observed in the belts, which have lasted so long as to make several revolutions hefore they were effaced. They appear to require a minute or two more ſor their rotation, and therefore have a westerly motion relative to the firm surface oſ the planet. This, however, cannot be depended on from the time of their rotationn. But a ſfew observations have been had of spots in the vicinity of the fixed spot of his surſace, and here the relative motion westward was distinetly observed. M. Schroeter at Manheim has observed the atmosphere of Jupiter vith great care, and finds it exceedingly variable; and spots are observed to change their situations with amazing rapidity, with great irregularity, but most commonly eastward. The motions and changes are so rapid, and s0 extensive, that we can scarcely consider them as the transſerence of matter ſrom one place to another. They more resemble the changes which happen in our atmosphere, which are sometimes progressive, over a great tract oſ the country. The storm in 1772 vas felt from Siberia to America in successionn. The gale blew from the west, but the ical operation which produced it was in the opposite direction, heing first observed in Siberia. Thręe days afterward, it was felt at St Petersburg; two days aſter this, at Berlin; two days more, it was in Britain; and seven days aſter, it was felt in North Americaa. Here then, while a spectator on the earth saw the clouds moving to the eastward, a spectator in the Moon would see the change of appearance proceed from east to vestt. The motions in the atmosphere of Jupiter must be very complicated, because they are the joint operation oſ four satellites The nequality oſ gravitation to the first satellite must be very greatt. And as each satellite produces a peculiar tide, the combination of all their actions must be very intricate. We can draw no conclusions from the variable spots, because their change of place is no proof of the actual trans ference of matter. Such a relative motion in our atmosphere and in the ocean may affect the rotation, retarding it, by its action on the eastern surſace oſ every obstacle Yet no change is observed. The year, and the periods of the planets, in the 5 time oſf Ptolemy, are the same with the present, that is contain the same number of rotations of the Earth Perhaps a compensation is maintained by this means ſor the acceleration that should arise from the transference of sil from the high land to the bottom of the sea, where it is moving round the axis with diminished velocity. 77. With this we conclude our account of physical atronomy—a department of natural philosophy which should ever be cherished with peculiar affection by all who think vell of human nature There is none in which the acces to well-founded knowledge seems so eſfectually barred against us; and yet there is none in which we have made such unquestionable progressnone in which we have aquired knowledge so uncontrovertibly supported, or complet. How much therefore are ve indebted to the man vho laid the magnificent scene open to our view, and who gave us the opties by which we can examjne its most extensive and its most minute parts For Newton not only taught us all that we know of the celestial meehanism, but also gave us the mathematics, without which it would have remained unseen.  Tu Pater et rerum Inventor. Tu patria-nohis  Suppeditas præcepta, tuisque ex inclyte chartis if Floriferis ut apes in saltibus omnia libant,  Omnia nos itidem depascimur aurea dicta  Aures, perpetuà semper dignissima vitàa.” LUCRETIUS. For surely the lessons are precious by which we are taught a system of doctrine which cannot be shaken, or share that fluctuation which has attached to all other speculations of curious man. But this cannot fail us, because it is nothing but a vell-ordered narration of facts, presenting the event of nature to us in a way that at once points out their subordination, and most of their relationss. While the magnificence oſ the objects commands respect, and perhaps raises our opinion of the excellence of human reason as high as l is justifiable, we should ever keep in mind that Newtons success vas owing to the modesty oſ his proceduree He peremptorily resisted all disposition to speculate beyond the province of human intellect, conscious that all attainable science consisted in careſully ascertaining nature's own laws, and that every attempt to explain an ultimate law of nature, by assigning its cause, is absurd in itselſ, against the acknovledged laws of judgment, and vill most certainly lead to error. It is only by following his example that we can hope for his success. It is surely another great recommendation oſ this branch of natural philosophy, that it is so simplee One single agent, a force decreasing as the square of the distance increases, is, oſ itself, adequate to the production of all the movements of the solar system. If the direction of the projection do not pass through the centre of gravity, the body will not only describe an ellipse round the central hody, but ill also turn round its axis. By this rotation, the body will alter its form; but the same power enables it to assume a new form, which is perfectly symmetrieal, and is permanent. This new form, however, in consequence of the universality of gravitation, induces a new motion in the body, by which the position of the axis is slowly changed, and the whole host of heaven appears to the inhabitants of this Earth to change its motionss Lastly, iſ the revolving planet have a covering of fluid matter, this fluid is thrown into certain regular undulations, which are produced and modified by the same power. Thus we see that, by following the simple fact of gravitation of every particle of matter to every other particle, through all its complications, we find an explanation of almost every phenomenon oſ the solar system that has engaged the attention of the philosopher, and that nothing more is needed for the explanation. Till we were put on this track of investigation, these different movements vere mlitary facts; and, being so extremely unlike, the wit oſ Vor. III. 2B man would certainly have attempted to explain them by causes equally dissimilar. The happy detection of this simple and easily-observed principle, by a genius qualified for ſollowing it into its various consequences, has freed us from numberless errors, into which we must have continually run while pertinaciously proceeding in an improper path. But this detection has not merely saved us from errors, but, which is most remarkable, it has brought into view many circumstances in the phenomena themselves, many peculiarities of motion, which would never have been observed by us, had we not gotten this monitor, pointing out to us where to look for peculiarities We should never have been able to prediet, with such wonderful precision, the complicated motions of some oſ the planets, had we not had this key to all the equations by which every deviation from regular elliptical motion is expressed. On all these accounts, physical astronomy, or the mechanism of the celestial motions, is a beautiſul department of science. I do not know any body of doctrine so comprehensive, and yet so exceedingly simple; and this consideration made me the more readily accede to those reasons of scientifie propriety which poit it out as the first article of a course of mechanical philosophy. Its simplicity makes it easy, and the exquisite agreement with observation maes it a fine example oſ the truth and competency of our dynamical doetrines. 48. But it has other recommendations, of a ſar greater valuee. Nothing surely so much engages a heart possessed of a proper sensibility, as the contemplation of order and harmony. No philosophy is requisite for being susceptible of this impressionn. We see it influence the conduet oſ the most uncultivatedlc What else does man aim at in all the bustle of cultivated society? Nay, even the savage makes some rude aim at order and ornament. But what we contemplate in the solar system is something more than mere order and symmetry, such as may be observed in a fine specimen of crystallization. The order oſ the solar system is made up of many palpable subserviences, where we see one thing plainly done for the sake of another thing. And, to render this still more interesting, a manifest utility appears in every circumstance of the constitution of the system, as far as we understand its applicability to what we conceive to be useſul purposess We ean mean nothing by utility but the subserviency to the enjoyments of sentient beings. Our opportunities for ohservations of this kind are no doubt very limited, confined to our own sublunary hahitation. But this circumseribed scene of observation is even crowded vith examples of utility. Surely it is unnecessary to recall our attention to the numberless adaptations of the systematic connexion with the S8un and Moon to the continuance and the diſfusion of the means of animal life and enjoyment. As our knowledge of the celestial phenomena is enlarged, the probability becomes stronger that other planets are also stored with inhabitants who share with us the Creator's bounty. Their rotation, and the evident changes that we see going on in their atmospheres, 50 much resemble vhat we experience here, that I imagine that no man, who clearly conceives them, can shut out the thought that these planets are inhabited by sentient beings. And there is nothing to forbid us from supposing that there is the same inexhaustible store of subordinate contrivance for their accommodation that we see here for living creatures in every situation, with appropriate forms, desires, and abilitiess I fear not to appesl to the heart of every man who has learned so much of the celestial phenomena, even the man who scouts this opinion, vhether he does not feel the disposition to entertain it. And I insist on it, that some good reason is required for rejecting it. 479. When beholding all this, it is impossible to prevent the surmise, at least, of purpose, design, and contrivance, from arising in the mind. We may try to shut it outWe may be convinced, that to allege any purpose as an argument for the reality of any disputed fact, is against the rules of good reasoning, and that final causes are improper topics of argument. But we cannot hinder the anatomist, vho observes the exquisite adaptation of every circumstance in the eye to the forming and rendering vivid and distinet a picture of external objects, from believing that the eye was made for seeingor the hand for handling. Neither can we prevent our heart from suggesting the thought of transcendent wisdom, when we contemplate the exquisite fitness and adjustment which the mechanism of the solar system exhibits in all its parts. 480. Newton was certainly thus affected, when he took a considerate view oſ all his own discoveries, and perceived the almost eternal order and harmony which results from the simple and unmixed operation of universal gravitation. This single fact produces all this fair order and utility. Newton vas a mathematician, and saw that the lav of gravitation observed in the system is the only one that can secure the continuance of order.. He was a philosopher, and saw that it was a contingent law of gravitation, and might have been otherwise. It therefore appeared to Newton, as it would to any unprejudiced mind, a law of gravitation selected as the most proper, out of many that were equally possible; it appeared to be a choice, the act oſ a mind, which comprehended the extent of its influence, and intended the advantages of its operation, being prompted by the desire of giving happiness to the works of almighty pover. Impressed with such thoughts, Newton breaks out into the following exelamation, è Elegantissima hœcce compages  Solis Planetarum et Cometarum, non nisi consilio et do-  minio Entis cujusdam potentis et intelligentis oriri poc tuit. Hœc omnia regit, non ut anima mundi, sed ut uni-  versorum Dominus mundorum. Et propter dominium  Dominus Deus, Naręær dici solet. Deitus est domi-  natio Dei, non in corpus proprium, uti sentiunt quibus  Deus est anima mundi, sed in servos, &e. These were the effusions of an affectionate heart, sympathising with the enjoyment of those who shared with him the advantages oſ their situation. Yet Newton did not Enow the full extent of the harmony that he had discovered. He thought that, in the course of ages, things would go into disorder, and need the restoring hand of God. But, as has been already observed, De la Grange has demonstrated that no such disorder will happen. The greatest deviations from the most regular motions will be almost insensible, and they are all periodical, waning to nothing, and agãin rising to their small maximum. 481. These are surely pleasing thoughts to a cultivated mind. It is not surprising thereſore that men of affectionate hearts should too ſondly indulge them, and that they should sometimes be mistaken in their notions oſ the purposes answered by some of the infinitely varied and complicated phenomena of the universee And it would be nothing but what ve have met with in other paths oſ speculation, should we see them consider a subservieney to this fancied purpose as an argument that an operation oſ nature is effected in one way, and not in another. In this way, the employment of final causes has sometimes obstructed the progress of knowledge, and has been produetive of error. But the impropriety of this kind of argumentation proceeds chieſly from the great chance of our being mistaken with respect to the aim of nature on the oceasionn. Could this be properly established as a fact, and eould the subserviency of a precise mode of accomplishing a particular operation be as clearly made out, I apprehend that, hovever unvilling the logician may be to admit this as a good reason, he cannot help feeling its great force. That this is true, is plain from the rules of evidence that are admitted in all courts; where a purpose being proved, the subserviency of a certain deed to that purpose is allowed to be evidence that this was the intention in the commission of that deed. It is, however, very rarely indeed that such argument can be used, or that it is wanted, and it never supersedes the investigation of the efficient cause. 482. But speculative men have of late years shevn a vonderful hostility to final causess. Lord Bacon had said, more vittily than justly, that all use of final causes should be banished from philosophy, because, like Vestals, they produce nothing This is not historically true; for much has been discovered by researches conducted entirely by notions of final causess What other evidence have we ſor all that we know concerning the nature of man? Is not this a part of the hook of Nature, and some of ĩts most beautiful pages? We know them only by the appearances of design, that is, by the adaptations of things in evident subserviency to certain resultss Are there no such adaptations to be seen, except in the works of man ? Nature is crowded with them on every hand, and some of her most important operations have been ascertained by attending to them. Dr Harvey discovered the cireulation of the blood in this very vay He saw that the valves in the arteries and veins were constructed precisely like those of a double forcing pump, and that the museles of the heart were also fitted for an alternate systole and diastole, so corresponding to the structure of those valves, that the whole was fit for performing such an offic. With holdness thereſore he asserted that the beatings of the heart were the strokes of this pump; and, laying the heart of a living animal open to the view, he had the pleasure of seeing the alternate expansion and contractions oſ its auricles and ventricles, exactly as he had expected. Here was a discovery, as curious, as great, as imporſant, as universal gravitation. In precisely the same way have all the discoveries in anatomy and physiology been madee. A new object is seen. The discoverer immediately examines its structurewhy ? To see what it can perform; and if he sees a number of coadaptations o a particular purpose, he does not hesitate to say, * this is its purpose? He has often been mistaken; but the mistakes have been gradually correctedhow? By discovering what is the real structure, and what the thing is really fit for performingg The anatomist never imagines that vhat he has discovered is of no use.* 488. So far therefore from banishing the consideration of final causes from our discussions, it would look more like philosophy, more like the love oſ true wisdom, and it would taste less of an idle curiosity, vere we to multiply our researches in those departments oſ nature where final causes are the chieſf objects of our attentionthe structure and economy of organised bodies in the animal and vegetable kingdoms. I cannot help remarking, vith regret, that of late years, the taste of naturalists has greatly changed, and, in my humble opinion, for the worsee The study of inert matter has supplanted that of animal lifee. Chemistry and mineralogy are almost the sole objects of attention. Nay, the ruins of nature, the shattered relics oſ a former world, seems a more engaging object than the numberless beauties that now adorn the present surface of our globe. I acknoWledge that, even in those inanimate vorks, God has not leſt himself without a witness. Yet surely we do not, in the howels of the Earth, nor even in the curious operations of chemical aſfinity, see so palpably, or so pleasantly, the incomprehensible wisdom and the providential beneficence of the Father oſ all, as in the animated objects of ngture. It is not easy to account for it, and perhaps the explanation would not be very agreeable, vhy many naturalists so * I would earnestly recommend to my young readers some excellent remarks on the argument of final causes (without which Cicero thought that there is no philosophy) in the preface by the editor of Derham's Physico- Theology, published at London in 1798. He there considers the proper province of this argument, its use, and incautious abuse, with the greatest perspicuity and judgment. fastidiously avoid such views of nature as tend to lead the mind to the thoughts of its Author. We see them even anxious to weaken every argument for the appearance oſ design in the construetion and operations of nature One should think, that, on the contrary, such appearance wouli be most welcome, and that nothing would be more dreary and comfortless than the belief that chance or fate rules all the events of nature. 484. I have been led into these reflections by reading a passage in M. de la Place's beautiful Synopsis of the Newtonian Philosophy, published by him in 1796, under the title of Système du Monde. In the whole of this work, the author misses no opportunity of lessening the impression that might be made by the peculiar suitableness of any circumstance in the constitution of the solar system to render it a scene of habitation and enjoyment to sentient beings, or which might lead the mind to the notion of the system's being contrived for any purpose whatever. He sometimes, on the contrary, endeavours to shew how the alleged purpose may be much better accomplished in some other way. He labours to leave a general impression on the mind, that the whole frame is the necessary result of the primitive and essential properties of matter, and that it could not be any thing but what it iss. He indeed concludes, like the illustrious Newton, with a survey oſ all that has been done and discovered, followed by some reflections suggested (as he says) by this survey.  Astronomy,” says M. de la Place,  in its present s state, is unquestionably the most brilliant specimen of the s powers of the human understanding He does not, however, tell us this is so manifest. He does not say how that this objeet, which has engaged, and so properly occupied this fine understanding, has any thing to justify the choice, cither on account of its beautiſul symmetry, or exquisite contrivance, or multifarious utility; or, in short, that it is an object that is vorth looking at. But he gives us to un- derstand, that astronomy has now taught us how much ve vere mistaken, in thinking ourselves an important part oſ the universe, for vhose accommodation much has been done, as if we were objects of peculiar caree. But we have been punished, says he, for these mistaken notions of selſimportance, by the foolish anxieties to which they have given rise, and by the subjugation to which we have submitted, while under the influence oſ these superstitious terrorss Mistaking our relations to the rest of the universe, social order has been supposed to have other foundations than justice and truth, and an abominable maxim has been admitted, that it vas sometimes useſul to deceive and to subdue mankind, in order to secure the happiness of society. But nature resumes her rights, and eruel experience has shewn that she will not allow those sacred laws to be broken with impunity. 485. I think it will require some investigation before we can find out what connexion there is between the discoveries of Sir Isaac Newton, and this mysterious detection that M. de la Place has at last deduced ſrom the survey. It is communicated in the dark words of an oracle, and we are leſt to interpret for ourselves. I can affix no meaning but this, that ignorance and selſ-conceit have made us imagime that this Earth is the centre, and the principal object of the universe, and that all that we see derives its value from its subserviency to this Earth, and to man its chieſ inhabitant. We ſondly imagined, that we are the objects oſ peculiar care,that ĩt is for us that the magnificent spectacle is displayed,and that our fortunes are to be read in the starry heavens. But it is now demonstrated that this Earth, vwhen compared, even with some single objects of our system, is but like a peppercornm. The whole system is but as a point in the universee How insigniticant then are we! But ve have been justly punished ſor our self-conceit, by imagining that the stars inſluence our fortunes, and have made ourselves the villing dupes of astrologers and soothsayers. Thus far I think that M. de la Place's words have some meaning, but, surely, very little importance; nor did ĩt call for any congratulatory address to his contemporaries on their emancipation from such fearss. It is more than a century since all thoughts of the central situation and great bulk of the Earth, and of the influence of the stars on human aſfairs, have been exploded and forgotten. But the remaining part oſ the remarks, about social order, and truth, and justice, and about deceiving and en slaving mankind, in order to seeure their happiness, is more mysterious.  More is meant than meets the ear M. de la Place carefully abstains, through the whole oſ this performance, from all reference to a Contriver, Creator, or Governor of the Universe, particularly in the present reflections, which are so pointedly contrasted with the concluding refleetions oſ the great Newton. The opposition is so remarkable, that it startles every reader who has perused the Principia. T cannot but suspeet that M. de la Place would here insinuate that the doctrine of a Deity, the Maker and Governor of this World, and of his peculiar attention to the conduet of men, is not consistent with truth; and that the sanctions of religion, which have long been venerated as the great security of society, are as little consistent with justic. The duties which we are said to owe to this Deity, and the terrors oſ punishment in a future state of existence for the neglect of them, have enabled vicked men to enslave the world, subjecting mankind to an oppressive hierarchy, or to some temporal tyrant. The priesthood has, in all ages and nations, been the great support oſ the despot's throne But now man has resumed his natural rights. The throne and the altar are overturned, and truth and justice are the order of the day. 486. This is by no means a groundless interpretation of De la Place's vords He has given abundant prooſs oſ these being his sentiments. It accords completely with his anxious endeavours, on all occasions, to flatten or depress every thing that has the appearance of order, beauty, or subserviency, and to resolve all into the irresistible operation of the essential properties of matter. 457. Oſ all the marks of purpose and oſ wise contrivance in the solar system, the most conspicuous is the selection of a gravitation in the inverse duplicate ratio oſ the distances. Till within these ſfew eventful years, it has been the professed admiration of philosophers oſ all sectss. Even the materialists have not always been on their guard, nor aken care to suppress their vonder at the almost eternal duration and order which it secures to the solar system. But M. de la Place amihilates at once all the wisdom of this selection, by saying, that this law oſ gravitation is essential to all qualities that are diffused from a centree It is the lav oſ action inherent in an atom of matter in virtue of its mere existence:. Thereſore, it is no indieation of purpose, or mark oſ choice, or example of wisdom. It cannot be otherwise Matter is what it is. M. de la Place was avare that this assertion, so contrary to a notion long and fondly entertained, would not be admitted without some unvillingness. He, therefore, gives a demonstration of his proposition. He compares the action of gravity, at different distances, with the illumination of a surſace placed at different distances from the radiant point. Thus, let light, diffused ſfrom the point A (Fig. 54.) shine through the hole B C D E, which we shall suppose an inch square, and let this light be received on a surface b c d e parallel to the hole, and twiee as ſar ſfrom A. We know that it will illuminate a surſace oſ ſour square inches. Thereſore, since all the light which covers these four inches, came through a hole of one inch, the light in any part of the illuminated surſace is four times weaker than in the hole, where it is four times denser. In like manner, the intensity, and efficiency of any quality diſfused ſrom A, and operating at twice the distance, must be four times less or weaker; and at thrice the distance ĩit must he nine times weaker, &e. &e. 488. But there is not the least shadow of prooſ here, nor any similarity, on which an argument may be founded. We have no conception of any degrees or magnitude in the intensity of any such quality as gravitation, attraction, or repulsion, nor any measure of them, except the very effect which we conceive them to produce. At a double distance, gravity will generate one-ſourth of the velocity in the same time. But this measure of its strength or weakness has no connexion whatever with density, or figured magnitude, on which connexion the whole argument is foundedl. What can be meant by a double density of gravity ? What is this density ? It is purely a geometrieal notion; and in our endeavour to conceive it with some distinctness, we find our thoughts employed upon a certain determined number of lines spreading every vay from the radiant point, and passing through the hole B CD E at equal distances among themselves. It is very true that the number oſ those lines which will be intercepted by a given surface at twice the distance vill be only onefourth of the number intercepted by the same surface at the simple distancee But I do not see how this can apply to the intensity of a mechanical force, unless we can consider this foree as an effect, and can show the influence of each line in producing the effeet which we call the fore, and which we consider as the cause of the phenomenon called gravitation. But if we take this view of it, ĩt is no longer an example of his propositiona force diffused from a centree For, in order to have the efficiency inversely as the square of the distance, it is measured by the number of efſicient lines intercepted. Here it is plain that the eſficiency of one oſ those lines is held to be equal at every distance from the centree Such incongruity is mere nonsense. This conception oſ a bundle oſ lines is the sole foundaE tion for any argument in the present case. La Place indeed tries to avoid this by a diſferent way oſ expressing his example. A certain quantity oſ light, says he, goes through the hole This is uniformly spread over four times the surſace, and must be four times thinner spread. But this, besides employing a gratuitous notion of light, vhich may be reſused, involves the same notion of discrete numerical quantity.. IF light be not conceived to consist of atoms, there can be no difference of density; and if we consider gravity in this way, we get into the hypothesis of mechanical impulsion, and are no longer considering gravity as a primordial force or quality. 489. But this pretended demonstration is still more deficient in metaphysical aceuracy The proposition to be demonstrated is, that the gravitation towards an atom of matter is in the inverse duplicate ratio of the distance, in whatever point of space the gravitating atom is placed. But if we take our proof of the ratio from the conception oſ these lines, and their density, ve at once admit that there are an infinity oſ situations in which there is no gravitation at all, namely, in the intervals of these lines. The number of situations in which the atom gravitates is a mere nothing in comparison with those in which it does not. We must either suppose that both the quality and the surface influenced by it are continuous, uninterrupted,or both must be conceived as discrete numerical quantities, the quality operating along a certuin number of lines, and the surſace consisting of a certain number of points. We must take one of these viewss. But neither of them gives us any conception of a different energy at diſferent distances. If the surface be continious, and the quality every where operative, there can be no difference of effect, unless we at once admit that the energy itself changes with the distance. But this change can have no relation to a change of density, a thing altogether inconceivable in a continuous substance;vwhere every place is full, there can be no more. On the other hand, if the quality be exerted only along certain lines, and the surface only contain a eertain number of points, ve can find no ground ſor establishing any proportion. 490. The simple and true state of the question is this. Suppose only two indivisible atoms, or tvo mathematical points of such atoms, in the universe If these atoms be supposed to attract each other, wherever they are placed, do we perceive any thing in our eonception of this force that can enable us to say that the attraction is equal or unequal, at different distances? For my own part I know nothing. The gravitation, and its law of action, are mere phenomena, like the thing which I call matter. This is equally unknown to me. I merely observe certain relations, which have hitherto been constant, and I am led by the constitution of my mind to expeet the continuation of these relations My collection of such observations is my knowledge of its naturee This gravitation is one of them, and this is all that I know about it. 491. The observed relations may be such that they involve certain consequences. This, in particular, has consequences that cannot he disputed. If gravitation in the ratio of ps be the primordial relation oſ all matter, and the source of all others (Which is part of La Place's system), it is impossible that a particle composed of such atoms can act with a force which decreases more rapidly by an increase of distance; but there are many phenomena which indicate a much more rapid decrease of forcee Simple eohesion oſ solid bodies is one of thesee The expansion of some exploding compositions shew the same thingg. We may add, that no composition of such atoms can form repelling particles, nor give rise to many expansive fluids, or indeed to any of the ordinary phenomena of elastic bodies. But these things are not immediately before us, and we shall have another and a better opportunity of considering many things connected with this great question. 492. De la Place is not the first person who has attempted a demonstration oſ this proposition. Dr David Gregory, in his valuable work on astronomy, has done the same thing, and nearly in the same way with La Place Leibnitz, in that strange letter to the editors oſ the Leiprig Review, in which he answers some of Gregorys objections to his own theory of the celestial motions, mentions an Italian professor vho gave the same argument, and affected to consider this ratio of planetary force as known to him before Newton's discovery. Leibnitæ thinks the argument a very good one, because, mathematically speaking, it is the same thing whether the rays be illuminative or attractive. If this be not nonsense, I do not know vhat is.Several compilers of elements employ the same argument; but nothing can be less to the purpose. Nothing can he more illogical than to speak of demonstrating any primordial quality. Newton was surely more interested in this question than any other person; and we may be certain that if he could have supported his discovery oſ this law of gravitation by any argument from higher principles, he most certainly would have done i. But there is no trace of any attempt of the kind among his writing/adoubtless because he saw the ſolly of the attempt. 493. I trust that the reader will forgive me ſor taking up s0 much of his time with this question. It scems to me of primary importancee Charged as I am with the instruetion of youth—the future hopes oſ our country—it is my bounden duty to guard their minds from every thing that I think hazardouss. This is the more incumbent on me, when I see natural philosophy calumniated, and accused of lending her support to doctrines which are the abhorrence oſ all the wise and good. I cannot better discharge this duty than by wiping off this stain, with which careless igl norance, or atheistical perversion, has disſigured the far features of philosophy. I was grieved when I first sa?v M. de la Place, aſter having so beautiſully epitomised the philosophy ofſ Sir Isaac Newton, conclude his perſormance with such a marked and ungraceful parody on the closing reflections of our illustrious master; and, as I varmly recommend this epitome to my pupils, it became the more necessary to take notice of the reprehensible peculiarities which occur in different parts of the work; and particularly of this proposition, from which the materialists seem to entertain such hopes. It is somewhat amusing to remark how the authority oſ Sir Isanc Newton has been eagerly catched at by the atheistjcal sophists to support their abject docetrines. While some hankering remained in France for the Atomistic philosophy, and there was any chance of bevildering the imaginations, and misleading the understandings, of such as wished to acquire a confident faith in the reveries of Democritus and Epicurus, M. Diderot worked into a better shape the slovenly performance of Robinet, the Systéme de la Nature, and aſffected to deduce all his vibrations and vibratiuncles from the elastic æther of Sir Isaac Newton, dressing up the scheme with mathematical theorems and corollariess And thus, Newton, one of the most pious of mankind, was set at the head of the atheistical sect. But this mode, having had its day, is now passed, and is become ohsolelethe tide has completely turned, and the æther is no longer wvanted. But the sect would not quit their hold of Sir Isaac Newtonn. The doctrine of universl ſate is now founded on Newton's great discovery of gravitation in the inverse duplicate ratio oſ the distances. It is still called the discovery of the illustrious Englishman, and is passed from hand to hand with all the authority of his name. 494. But surely to us, the scholars of Newton, the futi5 lity of this attempt is abundantly manifest. As the worthy pupils of our accomplished teacher, we vill join with him in considering universal gravitation as a noble prooſ of the existence and superintendence of a SuPREME MinD, and a conspicuous mark of irs transcendent wisdom The discovery oſ this relation between the particles oſ that matter of which the solar system consists is acknowledged, even by the materialists, to have set Newton at the head of philosophers. They must therefore grant that it has something in iĩt of peculiar excellencee Indeed whoever is able to ſollow the steps oſ Newton over the magnificent scene, must be affected as he vas, and must pronounce è all very good. It is peculiarly deserving of remark, that we see many contrivances in this system, which are of maniſest subserviency to the enjoyments of man, and which do not appear to have any farther importancee Man is unquestionably the lord of this lower world, and all things are placed under his feet. But we see nothing to which man is exclusively subservientnothing that is superior to man in excellence, s0 ſar as ve can judge of vhat is excellentnothing but that wisdom, that power, and that beneſicence, which seem to indicate and to characterise the Author and Conductor oſ the whole;and, I may add, that it is not one of our smallest obligations to the Author of Nature, that He has given us those powers of mind which enable us to perceive and to be delighted with the sight of this bright emanation oſ all his perſections.  Sanctius his animal, mentisque capacius altæ,  Finxit in effigiem moderantUm euncta Deorum,  Pronaque cum spectent animalia cætera terram,  Os homini sublime dedit, cœlumque tueri  Jussit, et erectos ad sidera tollere vultus.” OvD. Allow me to conclude in the words of Dr Halley: Vou. III. QcC Talia monstrantem mecum celebrate Camœnis, Vos, õ cœlicolim gaudentes nectare vesci, NEWTONUN, clausi reserantem scrinia Veri, NEWTONUM, Musis charum, cui pectore puro Phœbus adest, totoque incessit Numine mentem, Nec ſas ese propiũs mortali attingere divos.” HALL TEæLESCOPE, an optical instrument for viewing distant objects; so named by compounding the Greek words  fur off. and ææ to look at or contemplate. This name is commonly appropriated to the larger sizes of the instrument, while the smaller are called PERSPECTIVE GLASSES, SPY-GLASSES, OPERA-GLASSES. A particular kind, which is thought to be much brighter than the rest, is called a NIGHT-GLASS. To what has commonly been stated, respeeting the inventor of this most noble and useful instrument, ve may add the two ſollowing claims. Mr Leonard Digges, a gentleman of the last century, of great and various knovledge, positively asserts in his Stratoticos, and in another work, that his father, a military gentleman, had an instrument which he used in the field, by which he could bring distant objects near, and could know a man at the distance of three miless He says, that when his ſather was at home he had oſten looked through it, and could distinguish the waving of the trees on the opposite side of the Severnn. Mr Digges resided in the neighbourhood of Bristol. Francis Fontana, in his Celestiul Observations, published at Naples in 1646, says, that he was assured by a Mr Hardy, advocate of the parliament of Paris, a person of great learning and undoubted integrity, that on the death oſ his father, there was found among his things an old tube, by which distant objects were distinetly seen; and that it was of a date long prior to the telescope lately invented, and had been kept by him as a secret. It is not at all improbable, that eurious people handling spectacle-glasses, of which there were by this time great varieties, both convex and concave, and amusing themselves vith their magniſying power and the singular effects which they produced in the appearances of things, might sometimes chance so to place them as to produce distinet and enlarged visionn. We know perfectly, from the table and scheme which Sirturus has given us of the tools or dishes in which the spectacle-makers ſashioned their glasses, that they had convex lenses formed to spheres oſ 24 inches diameter, and oſ 11 inſerior sizess He has given us a scheme of a set which he got leave to measure belonging to a spectaclemaker of the name of Rogetie at Corunna in Spain; and he says that this man had tools of the same sizes for concave glasses. It also appears, that it was a general practice (of vwhich we do not know the precise purpose) to use a convex and concave glass together. If any person should chance to put together a 24-inch convex and a 12-inch concave (wrought on both sides) at the distance of  inches, he would have distinct vision, and the objeet would appear of double size:. Concaves of G inches were not uncommon, and one such combined with the convex of 24, at the distance of ò inches, would have distinet vision, and objects would be quadrupled in diameter. When such a thing occurred, it vas natural to keep it as a curiosity, although the rationale of its operation was not in the least understood. We doubt not but that this happened much oftener than in these two instances. The chief wonder is, that it was not frequent, and taken notice oſ by some writer. It ĩs pretty plain that Galileos first telescope was of this kind, made up of such spectacle- glasses as he could procure; for it magnified only three times in diameter,a thing easily procured by such glasses as he eould ſind with every speetacle-maker. And he could not but observe, in his trials of their glasses, that the deeper concaves and ſlatter convexes he employed, he produced the greater amplifieation; and then he would find himselſ obliged to provide a tool not used by the speetacle-makers, viz. either a much flatter tool for a convex surſace, or a much smaller sphere for a coneave: and, notvithstanding his telling us that it was by reflecting on the nature oſ reſraction, and without any instruction, we are persuaded that he proceeded in this very way. His next telescope magnified but five times. Now the slightest acquaintance with the obvious laws of reſraction would have directed him at once to a very small and deep concave, which would have been much easier made, and have magnified more But he groped his way vith such spectacleglasses as he could get, till he at last made tools for very flat object-glasses and very deep eye-glasses, and produeed a telescope which magnified about 25 times. Sirturus saW it, and took the measures of it. He aſterwards saw a scheme of it which Galileo had sent to a German prince at Insprueh, who had it drawn (that is, the circles for the tools) on a table in his gallery The object-glass was a planooonvex, a portion of a sphere, of 24 inches diameter; the eye-glass vas a double concave of two inches diameter: the focal distances were thereſore 2 inches and one ineh nearly. This must have been a very lueky operation, for Sirturus says it was the best telescope he had seen; and ve know that it requires the very best work to produee this magnifying power with such small spheres Telescopes continued to be made in this way ſor many years; and Galileo, though keenly engaged in the observation of Jupiters mtellites, being candidate for the prize held out by the Duteh for the discovery of the longitude, and thereſore much interested in the advantage vhich a convex eye-glas vould have given him, never made them of any other form Eepler published his Dioptries in 1611; in which he tells u all that he or others had discovered of the law oſ refraction, viz. that in very small obliquities of incidence, the angle of refraction was nearly Jd of the angle of incidence. This was indeed enough to have pointed out, with suſficient exactness, the construction of every optical instrument that we are even now possessed oſ; ſur this proportionality oſ the angles of incidence and refraction is assumed in the construetion of the optical figure for all of them; and the deviation from it is still considered as the reſinement of the art, and was not brought to any rule till 50 years aſter by Huyghens, and called by him ABERRATION. Yet even the sagacious Kepler seems not to have seen the advantage oſ any other construction of the telescope; he just seems to acknowledge the possibility of it; and ve are surprised to see writers giving him as the author of the astronomical telescope, or even as hinting at its construction. It is true, in the last proposition he shows how a telescope may be made apparently with a convex eye-glass: but this is only a frivolous fancy; for the eye-glass is directed to be made convex externally, and a very deep concave on the inside; so that it is, in ſact, a meniscus with the concavity prevalent. In the 86th proposition, he indeed shows that it is possible s to place a convex glass behind another convex glass, that an eye shall see objects distinet, magniſied, and inverted; anã he speaks very sagaciously on the subject. After having said that an eye placed hehind the point of union of the first glass will see an object inverted, he shows that a small part only will be seen; and then he shews that a convex glass, duly proportioned and properly placed, will show more of it. But in shewing this, he speaks in a vay which shows evidently that he had formed no distinet notions of the manner in which this eſſect would be produced, only saying vaguely that the convergency of the second glass would counteract the divergency beyond the focus of the first. Had he conceived the matter with any tolerable ditinctness, aſter seeing the great advantage oſ taking in a field greater in almost any proportion, he would have eagerly catched at the thought, and enlarged on the immense improvement. Had he but drawn one figure of the progress of the rays through two convex glasses, the whole would hãave been open to his view. This step, so easy and so important, was reserved ſor Fother Scheiner, and the construction of this author, together with that of Jansen, are the models on which all refracting telescopes are now constructed; and in all that relates to their magniſying power, brightness, and field of vision, they may be construeted on Kepler's principle, that the angles of refraction are in a certain given proportion to the angles of incidence. But aſter Huyghens had applied his elegant geometry to the discovery of Snellius, viz. the proportionality, not oſ the angles, but of the sines, and had ascertained the aberrations from the foci oſ infinitely slender pencils, the reasons were clearly pointed out why there were such narrow limits affixed by nature to the performance of optical instruments, in consequence oſ the indistinetness of vision which resulted from constructions where the magniſying power, the quantity of light, or the field of vision, were extended heyond certain moderate bounds. The theory of aberrations, which that most excellent geometer established, has enabled us to diminish this indistinctness arising from any of these causes; and this diminution is the sole aim of all the different constructions which have been contrived since the days of Golileo and Scheiner. The description which is commonly given of the various constructions oſ telescopes, is sufficient for instructing the reader in the general principles of their construction, and, with moderate attention, will show the manner in which the rays of light proceed, in order to ensure the different circumstances of amplification, brightness, and extent of field, and even distinctness of vision, in as ſar a; this depends on the proper intervals between the glases. But it is insufficient for giving us a knowledge of the improvements which are aimed at in the different departures from the original constructions oſ Galileo and Scheiner, the advantage of the double eye-glass of Huyghens, and the quintuple eye-glass of Dollond: still more is ĩt insuſficient for shewing us why the highest degrees of ampliſication and most extensive field cannot be obtained by the mere proportion of the focal distances of the glasses, as Kepler had taught. In short, without the Huyghenian doctrine of aberrations, neither can the curious reader learn the limits oſ their porformance, nor the artist learn why one telescope is better than another, or in what manner o proceed to make a telescope diſfering in any particular from those which he servilely copies. Although all the improvements in the construction oſ telescopes, since the publication of Huyghens's Dioptrics, have been the produetions of this island, and although Dr Smith of Cambridge has given the most elegant and perspicuous account of this seience that has yet appeared, we do not recolleet a perſormance in the English language (except the Optics of Emerson) whioh vill carry the reader beyond the mere schoolboy elements oſ the science, or enable a person oſ mathematical skill to understand or improve the construction of optieal instruments. We think, thereſore, that we shall do the public some service, by giving such an acoount of this higher branch of optical science as vill at least tend to the complete understanding of this noble instrument, by which our conceꝑtions of the extent oſ almighty power, and wisdom, and beneficence, are 50 vonderfully enlarged. In the prosecution of this, ve hope that many general rules will emerge, by which artists, vho are not mathematicians, may be enubled to construct optical instruments with intelligence, and avoid the many blunders and deſects which result from mere servile imitation. The general aim in the construction of a telescope, is o form, hy means of mirrom or lenses, an image oſ the distant ohjeet, as large, as bright, and as extensive as is posnible, consistently with distinctness; and then to view the image with a magniſying glass in any convenient mammer. This gives us an arrangement oſ our subject. We shall first show the principles oſ construction of the object- glass or mirror,  as that it shall ſorm an image of the distant object vith these qualities; and then show how to eonstruet the magnifying glass or eye-piece, s0 as to preserve them unimpaired. This indistinctness, which ve wish to avoid, arises ſrom two causes; the spherical ſigures oſ the reſracting and reflecting surfaces, and the diſſerent reſrangibility of the diſſerently coloured rays of light The first may be called the sPHERICAL, and the second the cHROMATIC indistinetness; and the deviations ſrom the foci, determined by the elementary theorem, may be called the sPHERICAL and the CH ROMATIC aberrations. The limits of a work like this will not permit us to give any more of the doctrine of aberrations than is absolutely necessary for the construction of achromatic telescopes; and we must refer the reader, for a general view oſ the whole, to Euler's Dioptrics, and other works oſ that kind. Dr Smith has given as much as was necessary for the comparison of the merits of diſferent glasses oſ similar construetion, and this in a very plain and elegant manner. We shall begin vith the aberration oſ colour, because it is the most simple. Let white or compounded light fall perpendicularly on the ſlat side P Q (Plate VI. Fig. 1.) oſ a plano-convex lens PVQ, whos axis is CV, and vertex V. The white ray pP ſalling on the extremity oſ the lens is dispersed by refraction at the point P oſ the spherical surſace, anũ the red ray goes to the point 7 oſ the axis, and the violet ray to the point . In like manner, the white ray  Q is dispersed by reſraction at Q, the red ray going to r, and the violet to v. The red ray Pr crosses the violet ray Qu in a pom D, and Q r crosses P ꝑ in a point E; and the whole ſight refracted and dispersed by the circumference, whose diameter is PQ, passes through the circular area, vhose diameter is D E. Supposing that the lens is of such a form that it would collect red rays, refracted by its whole surface in the point 7, and violet in the point v; then it is evident, that the whole light which occupies the surface of the lens will pass through this little cirele, whose diameter is D E. Therefore white light, issuing from a point distant that the rays may be considered as parallel, vill not be collected in another point or focus, but will be dispersed over the surface of that little circle, which is thereſore called the circle of chromatic dispersion; and the diant point ill be represented by this cirele The neighbouring points are, in like manner, represented by cireles; and these circles, encroaching on and mixing vith each other, must occasion haziness or confusion, and render the picture indistinett. This indistinctness will be greater in the proportion of the nũmber of circles which are in this manner mixed together. This will be in the proportion of the room that is for them; that is, in proportion to the area of the cirele, or in the duplicate proportion of its diameter. Our first business, therefore, is to obtain measures of this diameter, and to mark the eonnexion between it and the aperture and focal distance of the lens. Let i be to r as the sine of incidence in glass to the sine of refraction of the red rays; and let i be to v as the sine of incidence to the sine of refraction of the violet rajs Then we say, that vhen the aperture P Qis moderate, vr: v+r2i æDE: Pq, very nearly. For let DE, which iꝶ evidently perpendicular to Vr, meet the porallel incident rays in  and L, and the radii of the spherical surſace in G and H. It is plain that G P K is equal to the angle oſ incidence on the posterior or spherical sur- ſace of the lens; and G Pr and GPv are the angles oſ refraction oſ the red and the violet rays; and that G K, G D, and GE, are very nearly as the sines oſ those angles, because the angles are supposed to be small. We may therefore institute this proportion DE: KD ævr: ri; then, by doubling the consequents DE: 2 KD  9vn?7r: 22i. Also, DE: 2KD 4DE v—F :LLri rvr, =vr: rHv=2i. But 2D V D E is equal to XL or P Q. Thereſore we have DE : P Q /vv—rr: rv—2i. Q E. D. Cor. l. Sir Isanc Newton, by most accurate observation, found, that, in common glass, the sines of refraction oſ the red and violet rays were77 and 78 where the sine oſ ineidence vas 50. Hence it follows, that v—r is to v + r 2i as l to 55; and that the diameter of the smallest cirele of dispersion is -th part of that of the lens. 2. In like manner may be determimed the cirele of dispersion that vill comprehend the rays of any particular colour or set oſ colourss Thus all the orange and yelloW will pass through a circle vhose diameter is , 3 5th of that of the lens. 8. In different surfaces, or plano-convex lenses, the angles of aberration 7 P  are as the breadth P Q direetly, and as the focal distance VF inversely; because any angle DPE is as its subtense D E directly, and radius DP inversely. N. B. We call VF the focal distance, because at this distance, or at the point F, the light is most of all constipated. If we examine the focal distanee by holding the lens to the sun, we judge it to be where the light is drawn into the smallest spot. When we reflect that a lens of 53 inches in diameter has a circle of dispersion ſ5th of an inch in diameter, e are surprised that it produces any picture of an object that can be distinguishedlc We should not expect greater distinctness from such a lens than would be produced in a camera obseura without a lens, by simply admitting the light through a hdle oſ ,,th of an inch in diameter. This, w know, would be very hazy and confused. But when ve remark the superior vivacity oſ the yellow and orange light in comparison with the rest, ve may believe, that the efſeet produced by the conſusion oſ the other eolours will be much less sensiblee But a stronger reason is, that the light is much denser in the middle of the cirele oſ dispersion, and is exceedingly faint towards the marginn. This, however, must not be taken for granted; and we must know distinctly the manner in which the light of different colours is distributed over the cirele of chromatio dispersion, beſore we pretend to pronounce on the immense diſference between the indistinctness arising from colour, and that arising ſfrom the spherical figuree We think this the more necessary, because the illustrious diseoverer of the chromatic aberration has made a great mistake in the comparison, because he did not consider the distribution of the light in the cirele of spherical dispersion. It ĩs therefore proper to investigate the chromatie distribution of the light, and we shall then see that the superiority oſ the reflecting telescope is incomparably less than Newton imagined it to be. Thereſore, let EB (Fig. 2.) represent a plano-convex lens, of which C is the centre, and Cr the axiss Let us suppose it to have no spherical aberration, but to collect rays occupying its whole surface to single points in the axiss Let a beam oſ white or compounded light fall perpendicularly on its plane surfacee The rays will be so reſraeted by its curved surſace, that the extreme red rays will be collected at 7, the extreme violet rays at w, and those oſ intermediate refrangibility at intermediate points, o, u, &, b, ꝑ, v, of the line r®, which is nearly 4th of 7C. The extreme red and violet rays will eross each other at A and D; and A D vill be a section or diameter oſ the eircle oſ ehromatie dispersion, and will be about4 th oſ E B. We may suppose w r to he bisected in b, because œ b is I to b r very nearly in the ratio oſ equality (for r b: r C bA: cE, =mbA: cB,  wh: wC.) The line ru vill be a kind of prismatic spectrum, red from r to o, orangecoloured from o to , yellow from 3 to , green from Z to b, blue from b to ꝓ, purple ſrom ꝓ to v, and violet ſrom D to w. The light, in its compound state, must be supposed uniformly dense as it falls upon the lens; and the same must be said of the rays oſ any particular clour. Newton supposes, also, that when a white ray, such a; ? E, is dipersed into ĩts component coloured rays by refraction at E, it is uniformly spread over the angle DE A. This supposition is indeed gratuitous; but we have no argument o the contrary, and may therefore consider it as just. The consequence is, that each point , v, ꝑ, b, &e. oſ the spectrum is not only equally luminous, but ãlso illuminates uniformly its corresponding portion of AD; that is to say, the coating (so to term it) of any particular colour, such as purple, from the point , is uniſormly dense in every part of AD on which it falls In like manner, the colouring of yellow, intercepted by a part of AD in its passage to the point 3, is uniformly dense in all its parts. But the density oſ the diſferent colours in AD is extremely diſferent; for since the radiation in w ĩs equally dense with that in ꝓ, the density of the violet colouring, which radiates from », and is spread over the whole of AD, must he much less than the density of the purple colouring, which radiates ſrom ꝑ, and occupies only a part of AD round the cirele 5. These densities must be very nearly in the inverse proportion of w & to pb-. Hence we see, that the central point b will be very intensely illuminated by the blue radiating from ꝓb and the green intercepted from b . It will be more ſaintly illuminated by the purple radiating from u ꝑ, and the yellow inlercepted from ”; and still more ſaintly by the violet from w v, and the orunge and red intercepted from v r. The whole colouring vill be a white, tending a little to yelloæness. The aceurate proportion of these colourings may he computed from our knovledge of the position of the points o, v, & &c. But this is of little moment. Tt is of more consequence to be able to determine the proportion of the total intensity of the light in b to its intensity in any other point I. For this purpose drav r IR, In W, meeting the lens in R and W. The point I receives none of the light which passes through the space RW: for it is evident that b I CR æbA: CE, =I: 55, and that CR=CW,; and there fore, since all the light incident on EB passes through A B, all the light incident on RW passes through Ii (b i being made =b I). Draw o IO, yIV, IG, IpP, IoV. It is plain that I receives red light from R O, orange from OY, yellow from Y G, green from G E, a little blue from B P, purple from PV, and violet from VW. It thereſore wants some of the green and of the blue. That we may judge of the intensity of these colours at I, suppose the lens covered with puper pierced with a small hole at G. The green light only will pass through I; the other colours will pass between I and b, or between I and A, according as they are more or less refrangible than the particular green at I. This particular colour converges to g, and thereſore vill illuminate a small spot round I, where it will be as much denser than it is at G as this spot is smaller than the hole at G. The natural density at G, therefore, will be to the inereased density at I, as I' gG, or as gb to C, or as b I' to CG. In like man ner, the natural density of the purple coming to I through an equal hole at P will be to the increased density at Ias b I' to C ?2. And thus it appears, that the intensity of the differently coloured illuminations of any point of the circle of dispersion, is inversely proportional to the square oſ the distance from the centre of the lens to the point of its surſace through which the colouring light comes to this point of the circle of dispersionn This circumstance will give us a very easy, and, ve think, an elegant solution of the question. Bisect CE in F, and drav F L perpendicular to C E, making it equal to CF. Through the point L describe the hyperbola  LN of the second order, that is, having the ordinates E K, F L, RN, &e. inversely proportional to the squæares oſ the abscissæ CE, CF, CR, &e.; so that FL: RN =  ſ v or=CR?: CF, &. It is evident that these ordinates are proportional to the densities of the severally coloured lights which go ſfrom them to any points vhatever of the circle of dispersion. Now the iotal density of the light at I depends both on the density oſ each particular colour and on the number of colours which fall on itt. The ordinates of this hyperbola determine the first; and the space ER measures the number of colours which fall on I, because it receives light from the whole of ER, and of its equal BW. Therefſore, if ordinates be drawn from any point of ER, their sum will be as the whole light which goes to I that is, the total density of the light at I will be proportional to the area NR E E. Nov it is known that CE x E K is equal to the infinitely extended area lying beyond E K; and CR x E N is equal to the infinitely extended area lying beyond RN. Thereſore the area NR E X is equal to CR X RN C E x EX. But RN and EX are respectively equal o y-u and _ Therefore the density at I is proportionCR CE l l al to C F x Gr , = CP x ('qdæ). c w . CECR ER CF CF  E?cR  CFxcE'P  CE53 õ” But besau CF ; oſ CE, Tœl  ſ& 5 c' a constant quantity. Therefore the density oſ the light at I is proportional to or to because the points E and I are similarly situated in E C and Ab Farther, if the semi-aperture C E of the lens be called I, CF Al is =, and the density at I is= 58T Here it is proper to observe, that since the point R has the same situation in the diameter E B that the point I ha in the diameter A D oſ the circle oſ dispersion, the cirele described on E B may be conceived as the magnified repre sentation of the circle oſ dispersion. The point F, for instance, represents the point  in the circle of dispersion, vhich bisects the radius ? A; and f receives no light from any part of the lens which is nearer the oentre than F, being illuminated only by the light which comes through E F and its opposite BF. The same may be sid of every other point. In like manner, the density of the light in f, the middle . EF ,... EF between b and A, is measured by P vhich is = EPI. This makes the density at this point a proper standard of comparison. The density there is to the density at I as Ito AL or as 5 to AI and this is the simplest mode of comparison. The density half way from the centre of the circle of dispersion is to the density at any point I as b Ib IA Lastly, through L describe the common rectangular hyperbola k L n, meeting the ordinates of the former in è, L, and n; and drav Vh parallel to E C, eutting the ordinates in g,ſ, 7, &e. Then CR: CE  EV: Rn, and CR: CECRæEE: Rn—EE, or CR: REæEE: rn, and 1: TA æEE: r n. And thus we have a very simple expression of the density in any point of the circle oſ dis- persion. Let the point be any where, as at . Divide the lens at R as AD is divided in I, and then 7 n is as the density in I. These two measures were given by Newton; the first in his Treatise de Mundi Systémate, and the last in his Optics; but both without demonstration. If the hyperbola æ L n be made to revolve round the axis CQ, it will generate a solid spindle, which will measure the whole quantity of light which passes through different portions of the circle of dispersion. Thus the solid produced by the revolution of L &* will measure all the light which occupies the outer part of the cirele oſ dispersion lying without the middle of the radiuss. This space is ſths of the whole circle; but the quantity of light is but ;th of the whole. A still more simple expression of the whole quantity of light passing through different portions of the circle of chromatie dispersion may now be obtained as follows: It has been demonstrated, that the density of the light at I is us 2 or as 2 Suppose the figure to turn round the axis. I or R describe circumſerences of circles; and the whole light passing through this circumſerence is as the circumference or as the radius, and as the density . ER jointly. It is therefore as CE Drav any straight line Em, cutting R N in 5, and any other ordinate F L in ? R. The whole light which illuminates the circumferenee deseribed by I is to the whole light which illuminates the centre b as E R to E C, or as R5 to Cm. In like manner, the whole light which illuminates the circumference deseribed by the point  in the circle oſ dispersion is to the whole light which illuminates the centre b, as F æ to Cm. The lines Cm, RS, F æ, are therefore proportional to the whole light which illummates the corresponding circumſerences in the circle of dispersion. Vou. III. 2D x CR, that is, as ER. Therefore the whole light which falls on the cirele whose radius is bI, ill be represented by the trapezium in CRS; and the whole light which falls on the ring deseribed by IA, vill be represented by the triangle E s R; and  oſ any other portions. By considering the figure, we see that the distribution of the light is exceedingly unequal. Round the margin it has no sensible density; while its density in the very centre is incomparably greater than in any other point, being expressed by the asymptote of a hyperbola. Also the circle described with the radius o contains àths of the whole light. No wonder then that the confusion caused by the mixture of these cireles of dispersion is less than one should expect; besides, it is evident that the most lively or impressive colours occupy the middle of the spectrum, and are there much denser than the rest. The margin is covered vith an illumination of deep red and violet, neither of which colours are brilliant. The margin will be of a dark claret colour. The centre revives all the colours, but in a proportion of intensity greatly different from that in the common prismatic spectrum, because the radiant points L, P b, g, &. by which it is illuminated, are at such different distances from it. It will be white; but we apprehend not a pure white, being greatly overcharged ith the middle colours. These considerations show that the coloured fringes, vhich are observed to border very luminous objects seen on a dark ground through optical instruments, do not proceed from the object. glass of a telescope or microscope, but from an improper construction of the eye-glasses. The chromatic dispersion would produce ſringes oſ a different colour, vhen they produce any at all, and the colours would be differently disposed. But this dispersion by the object-glass can hardly produce any fringes: its effect is a general and almost uniſorm mixture oſ circles all over the field, which produces an uniſorm haziness, as iſ the object were viewed at an improper distance, or out of its ſocus, as ve vulgarly express it. We may at present form a good guess at the limit which this cause puts to the performance of a telescope. A point of a very distant object is represented, in the picture formed by the object-glass, by a little cirele, hose diameter is at least , 3,th of the aperture of the object-glass, making a very full allowance for the superior brilliancy and density of the central lightt. We look at this picture with a magnifying eye-glass. This magnifies the picture oſ the point. If it ampliſy ĩt to such a degree as to make it an object individually distinguishable, the confusion is then sensible. Now this can be computedl. An ohject subtending one minute of a degree is distinguished by the dullest eye, even although it be a dark object on a bright ground. Let us therefore suppose a telescope, the object-glass of which is of six ſeet focal distance, and one inch aperture. The diameter of the circle of chromatic dispersion will be ,3,th of an inch, which subtends at the centre of the object-glass an angle of about 94 seconds. This, when magnified six times by an eye-glass, vould become a distinguishable object; and a telescope of this length would be indistinet if it magnified more than six times, if a point were thus spread out into a spot of uniform intensity. But the spot is much less intense about its margin. It is found experimentally that a piece oſ engraving, having fine cross hatches, is not sensibly indistinet till brought so far from the limits oſ perfectly distinet vision, that this indistinctness amounts to & or b in breadthThereſore such a telescope will be sensibly distinet when it magniſies 36 times; and this is very agreeable to experience. We come, in the second place, to the more arduous task of ascertaining the error arising from the spherieal figure of the surfaces employed in optical instrumentsSuſfice it to say, beſore we begin, that although geometers have exhi- bited other forms of lenses which are totally exempt from this error, they canmot be executed by the artist; and we are thereſore restricted to the employment of spherical surfaces. Of all the determinations which have been given oſ spherical aberration, that by Dr Smith, in his Optics, which is un improvement of the fundamental theorem of that most elegant geometer Huyghens, is the most perspicuous and palpable Some others are more concise, and much better fitted for after use, and will thereſore be employed by us in the prosecution of this articlee But they do not keep in view the optical facts, giving the mind a picture of the progress of the rays, which it can contemplate and discover amidst many modifying circumstances. By ingenious substitutions oſ analytical symbols, the investigation is rendered expeditious, concise, and certain; but these are not immediate symbols of things, but of operations of the mind; objects suſficiently subtile of themselves, and having no need of substitutions to make us lose sight of the real subject; and thus our occupation degenerates into a process almost without ideass We shall therefore set out with Dr Smith's fundamental Theorem. 1. In Reflections. Let ABV (Fig. 3.) be a concave spherical mirror, of which C is the centre, V the vertex, CV the axis, and F the focus of an infinitely slender pencil of parallel rays pasing through the centre Let the ray a A, parallel to the axis, be reflected in A G, crossing the central ray C V inf Let AP be the sine of the semi-aperture AV, A D its tangent, and CD its secant. The aberration F ſ ſrom the principal focus of central rays is equal to of the excess V D of the secant above the radius, or very near equal to à of VP, the versed sine oſ the semi-aperture. For because A D is perpendieular to C A, the points C, A, D, are in a cirele, of which CD is the diameter; and because Af is equal to C, by reason of the equality of the angles AC, CA, and CAa, fis the centre of the cirele through C, A, D, and ſD is = 4 CD. But FC is = 2 CV. Therefore F fis  of VD. But because DV: VP /DC: VC, and D C is very little greater than VC when the aperture AB is moderate, DV is very little greater than VP, and Fſis very nearly equal to à of VP. z Cor. I. The longitudinal aberration is xv for PV is very nearly = AVV 2Q2c6v AVi Cor. 2 The lateral aberration F G is CV For FG: FrAP: Pf, mAV: 4 CV neurly, and AVS 2 AVS therefore FG/ TCV XTVEcv 2. In Refractions. Let AVB (Fig. 4. or 5) be a spherical surface separating two refracting substances, C the centre, V the vertex, AV the semi-aperture, A P its sine, PV its versed sine, and F the focus of parallel rays infinitely near to the axis. Let the extreme ray a A, purallel to the axis, be refracted into AG, crossing CF in , which is therefore the focus of extreme parallel rays. The rectangile of the sine of incidence, by the difference of the sines of incidence and refraction, is to the square of the sine of refraction, as the versed sine of the semi-aperture is to the longitudinal aberration of the extreme rays. Call the sine of incidence i, the sine of refraction r, and their difference d. Join CA, and about the centre  describe the arch AD.  Cor. 2. Because /P: PAVFſ: FG or FV: AV=CVf: FG nearly, AV we have F G, the lateral aberration, m F X trã AV AV ' F m432 gcv Cor. 8. Because the angle F-Af is proportional to p very nearly, ve have the angular abberration F A f i AVs AV l FFqVm43" gCcv In general, the longitudinal aberrations ſrom the focus of central parallel rays are as the squares of the apertures directly, and as the focal distances inversely; and the lateral aberrations are as the cubes of the apertures directly, and the squares of the focal distances inversely; and the angular aberrations are as the cubes oſ the aperture directly, and the cubes of the focal distances inversely. The reader must have observed, that to simplify the nvestigation, some small errors are admittedl. PV and PD are not in the exact proportion that ve assumed them, nor is Df equal to FV. But in the small apertures which suſfice for optical instruments, these errors may he disregarded. This spherical aberration produces an indistinctness of vision, in the same manner as the chromatic aberration does, viz. by spreading out every mathematical point of the object into a little spot in its picture; which spots, by mixing with each other, confuse the holee We must now determine the diameter of the circle oſ diffusion, as we did in the case of chromatic dispersion. Let the ray s. (Fig. 6) be reſracted on the other side of the axis, into a H,, cutting AfG in H, and draw the perpendicular E H. Call AVa, æV⸗, Vf (or VF, or V,, which in this comparison may be taken as equal) f, Ff =2b, and  Eox. Therefore æ is greatest when æ æ a u is greatest; that is, when - = 4 a. Therefore EH is greatest when P- is equal to the half of AP. When this is the case, ve have at the same time  x- .) the diameter of the circle of aberration through which the vwhole oſ the refracted light must pass, is ; oſ the diameter of the circle of aberration at the focus of parallel central rays. In the chromatic aberration it was 4; so that, in this respeet, the spherical aberration does not create o great confusion as the chromatic. We are now able to compare them, since ve have now the measure of both the circles of aberration. It has not heen found possible to give more than four inches of aperture to an object-glass of 100 feet focal ditance, so as to preserve suſficient distinctness If we compute the diameter of the circle EH corresponding to this aperture, we shall find it not much to exceed 790.000 an inch. If we restriet the circle of chromatic dispersion to -3, of the aperture, phieh is hardly the fifth part oſ the vhole dispersion in it, it is of an inch, and is about I900 times greater than the other. The circle of spherical aberration of a plano-convex lens, vith the plane side next the distant object, is equal to the cirele oſ ehromatic dispersion vhen the semi-aperture is about 15: For we saw formerly that E H is  of F G, 7? AP l and that F G is V TAC and thereſore EG4 AP? . SX This being made a gives us A P : Sæ Suat. vhich is nearly ap. and corresponds to an aperture oſ 30° diameter, if r be to ĩ as 3 to 2. Sir Isaac Newton was thereſore vell entitled to say, that it was quite needless to attempt figures which should have less aberration than spherical ones, while the confusion produced by the chromatic dispersion remained uncorrected. Since the indistinctness is as the squares of the diameters of the cireles of aberration, the disproportion is quite beyond our imagination, even vhen Newton has made such a liberal allowance to the chromatic dispersionn. But it must be acknowledged, that he has not attended to the distribution oſ the light in the cirele of spherical aberration, and has hastily supposed it to be like the distribution of the coloured light, indefinitely rare in the margin, and denser in the centre. We are indebted to Father Boscovich for the elegant determination of this distribution, from which it appears, that the light in the margin of the cirele of spherical aberration, instead of heing incomparably rarer than in the spaces between it and the centre, is incomparably denser. The indistinctness thereſore produced by the intersection oſ these luminous circumferences is vastly great, and increases the vhole indistinctness exceedingly. By a gross calculation vhich we have made, it appears to be increased at least 500 times. The proportional indistinctness, therefore, instead of being I900° to , is only a6% or nearly 7220 to a proportion still suſficiently great to varrant Newton's preference of the reflecting telescope of his invention. And we may nov observe, that the reflecting telescope has even a great advantage over a refracting one of the same focal distance, vith respect to its spherical aberration: For have seen (Cor. 2.) that the lateral aberration is 20 C ⸗ This for 3 ar And the diaa plano-convex glas is nearly meter of the circle of aberration is one-ſourth of this, or AVS . ; x55v In like manner, the lateral aberration of a con3 cave mirror is 7 and the diameter oſf the circle of B dispersion is sœ and therefore, if the surfaces were portions of the same sphere, the diameter of the circle of aberration of refracted rays would be to that of the cirele of aberration of reflected rays as,% to ; or as ꝗ to 4. But vhen the refracting and reflecting surfaces, in the position here considered, have the same focal distance, the radius of the refracting surface is four times that of the reflecting surfacee The proportion of the diameters of the circles of spherical aberration is that of ꝗ x 4* to 4, or of 144 to 4, or 36 to I. The distinctness, thereſore, of the reflector is 86  36, or 1296 times greater than that of a plano-convex lens (placed with the plane side next the distant object) of the same breadth and focal distance, and will therefore admit of a much greater magnifying power. This comparison is indeed made in circumstances most ſavourable to the reflector, because this is the very worst position of a plano-convex lens But we have not as yet learned the aberration in any other position. In another position, the refraction and consequent aberration of both surfaces are complicated. Before we proceed to the consideration of this very diſficult subject, we may deduce, from what has been already demonstrated, several general rules and maxims in the construction of telescopes, which vill explain (to such readers as do not wish to enter more deeply into the subject) and justify the proportion which long practice of the best artists has sanctioned. Indistinctness proceeds from the commixture of the circles oſ aberration on the retina of the eye: For any one sensible point of the retina, being the centre of a cirele oſ aberration, will at once be affected by the admixture of the rays of as many diſſerent pencils of light as there are sensible points in the area of that circle, and will convey to the mind a mixed sensation oſ as many visible points of the object. This number will be as the area oſ the cirele oſ aberrations, whatever be the size of a sensible point of the retina. Now, in vision with telescopes, the diameter of the circle of aberration on the retina is as the apparent magnitude of the diameter of the corresponding circle in the focus of the eye-glass; that is, as the angle subtended by this diameter at the centre of the eye-glass; that is, as the diameter itself directly, and as the focal distance of the eye-glass inversely. And the area of that circle on the retina is as the area of the cirele in the focus of the eye-glass directly, and as the square of the focal distance oſ the eyeglass inversely. And this is the measure of the apparent indistinetness. Cor. In all sorts of telescopes, and also in compound microscopes, an objeet is seen equally distinct when the focal distance of the eye-glasses are proportional to the dia6 meters of the circles of aberration in the focus of the object-glass. Here we do not consider the trifling alteration which vell-construeted eye-glasses may add to the indistinct ness of the ſirst image. In reſracting telescopes, the apparent indistinctness is as the area of the object-glass directly, and as the square oſ the focal distance of the eye glass inversely. For it has been shown, that the area oſ the circle of dispersion is as the area oſ the object-glass, and that the spherical aberrætion is insignificant when compared vith this. Therefore, to make reflecting telescopes equally distinet, the diameter oſ the object-glass must be proportional to the focal distance of the eye- glass. But in reflecting telescopes, the indistinctness is as the sixth power of the aperture of the object. glass directly, and as the fourth pover oſ the focal distance of the object- glass and square of the ſocal distance of the eye-glass inversely. This is evident ſrom the dimensions of the cirele of aber3 ration, which was found proportional to . : Therefore, to have them equally distinct, the cubes of the apertures must be proportional to the squares of the focal distance multiplied by the focal distance of the eyeglass. By these rules, and a standard telescope of approved goodness, an artist can always proportion the parts of any instrument he wishes to constructt. Mr Huyghens made one, of which the objeet- glass had 30 feet focal distance and three inches diameter. The eye-glass had 3,8 inches focal distancee And its perſormance was found superior to any which he had seen; nor did this appear owing to any chance goodness of the object-glass, because he found others equally good which were constructed on similar proportions. This has therefore been adopted as a standard. It does not at first appear how there can be any diſi l culty in this matter, because we can always diminish the aperture of the object-glass or speculum till the circle of aberration is as small as we pleasee But by diminishing this aperture, we diminish the light in the duplicate ratio of the aperturee Whatever be the aperture, the brightness is diminished by the magnifying power, which spreads the light over a greater surſace in the bottom of the eye. The apparent brightiess must be as the square oſ the aperture of the telescope directly, and the square of the amplification of the diameter of an object inversely. Objects, thereſore, will be seen equally bright, if the apertures of the telescopes be as the focal distances of the object-glasses directly, and the ſocal distance of the single eye-glass (or eye-glass equivalent to the eye-piece) inversely. Therefore, to have telescopes equally distinet and equally bright, we must combine these proportions with the former. It is needless to go ſarther into this subject, because the construction of refracting telescopes has been s0 materially changed by the correction of the chromatic aberration, that there can hardly be given any proportion between the object-glass and eye-glasses. Every thing now depends on the degree in which we can correct the aberrations of the object-glass We have been able so far to diminish the chromatic aberration, that we can give very great apertures without its becoming sensiblee But this is attended with 50 great an increase of the aberration oſ figure, that this last becomes a sensible quality. A lens which has 00 for its semi-aperture, has a circle of aberration equal to its chromatic aberrationn Fortunately ve can derive from the very method of contrary refractions, which we employ for removing the chromatic aberration, a correction oſ the otherr. We are indebted for this contrivance, also, to the illustrious Newton. We call this Newtons contrivance, because he vas the first who proposed a construction of an object-glass, in which the aberration was corrected by the contrary aberrations of glass and water. Huyghens had indeed supposed, that our all-wise Creator had employed in the eyes oſ animals many refractions in place of one, in order to make the vision more distinet; and the invidious detractors from Newton's fame have catched at this vague conjecture as an indication oſ his knovledge of the possibility oſ destrojing the aberration of figure by contrary refractionss. But this is very ill-founded. Huyghens has acquired sufficient reputation by his theory of aberrationss. The scope of his writing in the passage alluded to, is to show, that by dividing any intended refraction into parts, and producing a certain convergence to or divergence from the axis of an optical instrument by means of two or three lenses instead of one, we diminish the aberrations four or nine times. This conjecture about the eye was thereſore in the natural train of his thoughts. But he did not think of destroying the aberration altogether by opposite refractionss Newton, in 1669, says, that opticians need not trouble themselves about giving figures to their glasses other than spherical. Iſ this figure were all the obstacle to the improvement of telescopes, he could shew them a construction of an objecetglass, having spherical surfaces, vhere the aberration is destroyed; and accordingly gives the construction of one composed of glass and water, in which this is done completely by means of contrary refractions. The general principle is this: When the radiant point R, (Fig. T.) or focus oſ incident rays, and its conjugate focus F of refracted central rays, are on opposite sides oſ the refracting surſace or lens V, the conjugate focus f of marginal rays is nearer to R than F is But when the focus of incident rays R' lies on the same side with its conjugate focus  for central rays, Rf is greater than RrF. Nov Fig. 8. represents the contrivance for destroy- ing the eolour produced at F, the principal focus of the convex lens V, of crown glass, by means oſ the contrary refraction of the concave lens v of flint glass. The incident parallel rays are made to converge to F by the first lens. This convergence is diminished, but not entirely destroyed, by the concave lens v, and the focus is formed in F. F and V therefore are conjugate foci oſ the concave lens. If F be the focus of V for central rays, the marginal rays vill be collected at some point f nearer to the lens. If F be nov considered as the focus of light incident on the centre of », and F be the conjugate focus, the marginal ray p F would be refracted to some point ſ' lying beyond F. Therefore the marginal ray ꝓ7 may be refracted to F, if the aberration of the concave be properly adjusted to that of the convex. This brings us to the most diſficult part of our subject, the compounded aberrations of diſſerent surfaces. Our limits will not give us room ſor treating this in the same elementary and perspicuous manner that we employed for a single surſacee We must try to do it in a compendious way, which will admit at once the different surſaces and the different refractive powers oſf diſferent substances. This must naturally render the process more complicated; but we hope to treat the subject in a way easily comprehended by any person moderately acquainted with common algebra; and ve trust that our attempt will be favourably received by an indulgent public, as it is (as far as ve know) the only dissertation in our language on the construction of achromatic instruments. We cannot but express our surprise at this indiſference about an invention which has done so much honour to our country, and which now constitutes a very lucrative branch of its manufacture Our artists infinitely surpass all the performances of ſoreigners in this branch, and supply the markets of Europe without any competition; yet it is from the writings on the Continent that they derive their scientific instruction, and parti- cularly from the dissertations of Clairaut, who has vonderfully simplified the analysis of optieal propositions We shall freely borrow from him, and from the writings oſ Abbẽ Boscovich, who has considerably improved the first views of Clairautt. We recommend the originals to the curious reader. Clairaut's dissertations are to be found in the Memoirs of the Academy of Paris, 1756, &e.; thoæ of Boscovich in the Memoirs of the Academy of Bologns and in his five volumes of Opuscula, published at Bassam in 1785. To these may be added DAlembert and Euler. Lemma I. In the right-angled triangle MX S, (Fig- 9.) of which one side M Xis very small in comparison of either of the others; the excess oſ the hypothenuæ M S, above the side X S, is very nearly equal to u5 or to : For if about the centre S, vith the radius SM, we describe the semicirele AM O, ve have A X x X. O æ MX2. Nov AX MS SX, and XO, is nearly qual 1o 2MS o: 22 S: on the other hand, MS is nearly equal  X 8 4 x ; and, in ſike manner, M Gis nearly equal ” ſò + XG, and MH is nearly equal to MX? 7Xu +XH. Pnoe. I. Let the ray m M, incident on the spherical surface AM, converge to G; that is, let G be the focus oſ incident rays. It is required to find the focus F of refracted rays? Let m express the ratio oſ the sine oſ incidence and refraction; that is, let m be to I as the sine of incidence to the sine oſ refraction in the substance of the sphere. Then MG: GS æ sin. MS H: sin. S MG, and m: 1 æ3sin. SMG: sin. SMH; But this equation is quadratic. We may avoid the solution by an approximation which is suſficiently accurate, 2 by substituting for æ in the fraction e (7hich is very small in all eases oſ optical instruments), an approximate value very easily obtained, and very near the truth. This is the focal distance of an infinitely slender pencil oſ rays converging to G. This ve know by the common optical amr theorem to be——— Let this be called è; if ve mlrua substitute æ in place of this value of ? becomes am ma V; This gives us, by the bye, an easily remembered expression (and beautifully simple) of the refracted focus of an infinitely slender pencil, corresponding to any distance . . ; am .  —/&-&4—D, 0 st r of the radiant point. For since ? mau ? mu ma& m aok I UE be ,—-SS=42—.We may even am am am a m express it more simply, by expanding , and it becomes I1 l l — ov-, Now put this value of : in place of the : in the analogy employed abovee The first term of the analogy bec ke 2a + Ia Im . 2 now becomes l  xa m , mnke r Hence Qm 2 comes r Vti , or æ æ The analogy : : : VGE we obtain the linear equation m r æ  mãu mro + mEa:æ? arke? : 5=a rk æa mn from which we finally deduce If for AX we substitute its approximated value E n æ To have used this 205 fa value would not have much complicated the calculus; but it did not oceur to us till we had finished the investigation, and it would have required the whole to he changed. The operation in pages 485 and 436 is another source of error. But these errors are very inconsiderable when the aperture is moderat. They increase for the most part with an increase of aperture, but not in the proportion of any regular function of it; so that we canmot improve the ſormula by any manageable process, and must he contented with it. The errors are precisely the same with those of Dr Smith's theorem, and indeed with those of any that we have seen, vhich are not vastly more complicated. As this is to be ſrequently combined with subsequent operations, ve shorten the expression by putting  for Jis I ũ a z Then ? ? will express the aberration of the first refraction ſrom the focal distance of an infinitely slender pencil; and now the focal distance of refracted rays is 7  &/. If the incident rays are parallel,  becomes infinite, and should have A X - 3 But, in this case, k becomes =, and - ?44 12 and ? = 2 and becomes m m—I l c ã x m x x / ES 2;mT)ma aberration of extreme parallel rays. We must now add the refraction of another surface. Lemma 2. If the focal distance A G be changed by a small quantity G 5, the focal distance AH will also be changed by a small quantity H h, and we shall have This is the m AG: AH =Gg : HA Drav M g, M h, and the perpendiculars G i, H &. Then, because the sines of the angles of incidence are in a constant ratio to the sines of the angles of refraction, and the increments of these small angles are proportional to the increments of the sines, these increments of the angles are in the same constant ratio. Thereſore, We have the angle C M⸗ to H M h as m to l. Now Gg: Gi m AG: AM, and Gi: hE=m AG: H A and hlk: HR=MA: AH: therefore Gę: Hhmm AG: AH. The easiest and most perspicuous method for obtaining the aberration of rays twice refracted, will be to consider the first reſraction as not having any aberration, and determine the aberration of the second refractionn. Then conceive the focus of the first refraction as shifted by the aberration This will produce a change in the focal distance of the second refraction, which may be determined by this Lemma. Pror. II. Let AM, BN (Fig. 10.) be two spherical surfaces, including a refracting substance, and having their centres C and c in the line A G. Let the ray a A pass through the centres, which it will do without refraction. Let another ray m M, tending to G, be reſracted by the first surſace into M H, cutting the second surface in N, where it is farther refracted into N I. It is required to determine the focal distance BI? It is plain that the sine oſ incidence on the second surface is to the sine of reſraction into the surrounding air as 1 to m. Also B I may be determined in relation to BH, by means of BH, Nu, Be, and 3 in the same way that A H vas determined in relation to A G, by means of AG, MX, AC, and m. Let the radius of the second turſace be I, and let e still express the semi-aperture, (because it hardly diſfers from Næ) Also let æ be the thickness oſ the lens Then ob serve, that the focal distance of the rays refracted by the first surface, (neglecting the thickness of the lens, and the aberration of the first surſace), is the distance of the radiant point for the second refraction, or is the focal distance of rays incident on the second surface. In place of r, therefore, ve must take ?; and as ve make æ in order to abbreviate the calculus, let us now make I æ E Lastly, in place of  =2 (1 =z make / G1)æ/V) -2r 2 % Thus we have got an expression similar to the other; and the focal distance B I, aſter two reſractions, becomes BIæſf: (-:?r?. But this is on the supposition that B H is equal to , vhereas it is really?  /2æ This must occasion a change in the value just now obtained of B I. The source of the change is twoſold. lst, Because, in the value l l l 2ve must put ,⸗ 47 and because we must ; : m I do the same in the fraction In the second place, when the value q is diminished by the quantity ? + æ, B I vill suſfer a change in the proportion determined by the 2d Lemma. The first difference may saſely be neglected, because the value of / is very small, by reason of the co-efficient - being very small, and also because the variation bears a very small ratio to the quantity itselſ, vhen the true value oſ ? differs but little from that of the quantity for which it is employedc The chief change in B I is that which is determined by the Lemma. Therefore take from B I the variation of BH, multiphed by bol nE , which is very nearly = The produet oſ this multiplication is m ? .+ n This being taken from f, leaves us ſor the value of B IF (m +). In this value, ſ is the focal distance of an infinitely slender pencil of rays twice refracted by a lens having no thickness, i5 the shortening occasioned by the thickness, and f? (ms +7) is the eſfect of the two aberrations arising ſrom the aperture. It will be convenient, for several collateral purposs, to exterminate from these formulæ the quantities , I, and ,. For this purpose make tu We have already Therefore 2=q7m1(by costruction, page 435, Prop. II.) becomes 377; This last value oſ æ (the reciprocal of the focus of a slender pencil twice reſracted), viz. simplest that can be imagined, and makes n as a substitute for H . 3 a most useſul symbol, as we shall frequently find in the sequel. It also gives a very simple expression of the focal distance of parallel rays, which we may call the principal focal distance of the lens, and distinguish it in ſuture by the symbol ꝓ; for the expressio Viu  E becomes E l vhen the incident light is paralle. And this gives us another very simple and useſul measure of f; ſor 7 becomes 7 + These equations deserve thereſore to be made very ſamiliar to the mind. We may also take notice of another property of n. It is half the radius oſ an isosceles lens, which is equivalent to the lens whose radii are a and b: for suppose the lens to be isosceles, that is, a b; then n = :2- : Nov, the second o is negative if the first be positive, or positive if the first be negativee Thereſore æ Ji. : ES u = tance of this lens is and so is that of the other, and they are equivalent. But, to proceed with our investigation, recollect that we l rP P§ the thickness of the lens) is /? Gpnp =5 ] 7 If we now rite for , I, and,, their value as determined above, perſorming all the necessary multiplications, and arrange the terms in such a manner as to collect in one sum the co-eſficients of a, n, and r, ve shall find 4 terms for the value of m, and 10 for the value of ?. The 4 are destroyed by as many vith contrary signs in the value of ?, and there remain 6 terms to express the value oſf m, +, which we shall express by one symbol q; and the equation stands thus: m—I? m Lm +m m+22 m +m 9m  au a'n rn* 4m+4 SmF2 arn n ] The focal distance, thereſore, of rays twice reſracted, reckoned ſfrom the last surface, or B I, corrected for aber: n ration, and for the thickness of the lens, is / ſ 5 s? q, consisting of three parts, viæ. f, the focal distance of central rays; ſ i- the correction ſor the thickness oſ the lens; and ſq the aberration. The above formula appears very complex, but is of very easy management, requiring only the preparation of the simple numbers which form the numerators of the fractions included in the parenthesiss When the incident rays are parallel, the terms vanish which have r in the denominator, so that only the three first terms are used. We might here point out the cases which reduce the aberration expressed in the formula last referred to, to nthing; but as they can scarcely occur in the object-glass I 5 . of a telescope, ve omit it for the present, and proceed to the combination of two or more lenses. Lemma 3. If AG be changed by a small quantity G⸗, B I suffers a change Ii, and Gę: Ilm AG: BI. For it is well known that the small angles GM 5 and INi are equal; and thereſore their subtenses G , In, are proportional to MG, NI, or to AG, A I, nearly when the aperture is moderate. Thereſore we have (nearly) GE: In: AG: BI In: IiD AM: BI Gęg: GEF= AG: AM Therefore G: Ii m AG': BI Propr. III. To determine the focal distance of rays refracted by two lenses placed near to each other on a common axis. Let AM, BN (Fig. 11.) be the surfaces oſ the first lense, and CO, D P be the surfaces of the second, and let à be the thickness of the second lens, and ) the interval between them. Let the radius of the anterior surface of the second lens be , and the radius of its posterior surface be V. Let m be to l as the sine of incidence to the sine of refraction in the substance of the second lens. Lastly, let be the principal focal distance of the second lenss. Let the extreme or marginal ray meet the axis in L aſter passing through both lenses, so that DL is the ultimate focal distance, reckoned from the last surface. It is plain that DL may be determined by means of a, t, m, §, and CI, in the same manner that BI was determined by means of a, b, m, ꝓ, and AG. 2 The value of BI is 7—mL; r7 q. Take from this ? 2 the interval 3, and we have C I nZ 1~r2q. Let the small part m L 2 q be neglected for the present, and let C I be supposed f. As we formed ?, ſ, and q, by means of a, b, m, n, and r, let us now ſorm , and q, for the second lens, by means of œ, V, w, , c 4 , and ?. ? will be the focal distance oſ a slender pencil refracted by the first surface, ſ vill be the focal distance of this pencil after two refraetions, and 7 vill be the co-efficient of the aberration, negleeting te thickness and interval of the lenses. Proceding in this vay, DL vill be  mſ  5. But because CI is really less than f, by the quantity 2 m - E +3 4ſ q, we must (by Lemma 3.) subtract the _ of this quantity, multpli-A by 3 (hich is 'a By this process, we shall have oL=rr Cſ4) aro The first term ſ of his value of DI is the focal ditance of a slender pencil oſ central rays refracted by hoth lenses, negloo ing their thickn and distance; the second rm, ſ  nt ma is the correction necessary ſor these i— and the third term, ſ +9) is the correction for the aperture 2 e. And it is evident that ꝗ is a formula precisely similar to ꝗ, containing the same number of terms, and differing only by the w, a, n, and 7, employed in place of m, a, n, and r. It is also evident, that iſ there be a third lens, we shall obtain its ſocal distance by a process precisely similar to that by which we obtained D L; and so on for any number of lenses. Thus have we obtained ſormulæ by which the ſoci of rays are determined in the most general terms; and in such a manner as shall point out the connexion oſ the curvatures, thicknesses, and distances of the lenses, with their spherical aberrations, and with the final aberration oſ the compound lens, and give the aberrations in separate symbols, so that we can treat them by themselves, and subject them to any conditions which may enable us to correct one of them hy another. We also see, in general, that the correction for the thickness and distance of the lenses are exhibited in terms which involve only the focal distances of central rays, and have very little influence on the aberrations, and still less on the ratio of the aberrations of the diſferent lenses. This is a most convenient circumstance; for we may neglect them while we are determining q and ?, and in determining the ratio of the focal distances of the several lenses, on which the correction of the chromatic aberration chiefly depends. Therefore, in the construction oſ a compound lens ſor uniting the diſferent colours, ve may neglect this correction for the thickness and distance till the end of the process. When ve apply it, we shall find that it chieſly affects the fimal focal distance, making it somewhat longer, but has hardly any influence either on the chromatic or spherical aberration. We do not hesitate to say, that the ſinal formulæ here given are abundantly accurate, while they are vastly more manageable than those employed by Euler or D Alembert. We have calculated trigonometrically the progress of the rays through one oſ the glasses, which will be given as an example, giving it a very extravagant aperture, that the errors of the formulæ might be very remarkable We found the real aberration exceed the aberration assigned by the formula by no more than ;; part, a diſference which is quite insignifieant. The process here given derives ĩts simplicity ſfrom the frequent occurrence of harmonic proportions in all optieal theorems. This enabled Mr Clairaut to employ the reciprocals of the radii and distances with so much simplicity and generality. We consider it as another advantage of Mr Clairauts method, that it gives, by the way, ſormulæ for the more ordinary questions in optics, which are of wonderful simplicity, and most easily remembered. The chieſ problems in the elementary construction of optical instruments relate to the focal distances of central rays. This determines the focal distances and arrangement oſ the glassess. All the rest may be called the refinement of opties; teaching us how to avoid or correct the indistinctness, the colours, and the distortions, which are produced in the images formed by these simple constructionss We shall mention a few oſ these formulæ which oceur in our process, and tend greatly to abbreviate it vhen managed by an experienced analyt. Let m be to l as the sine of incidence to the sine of refraction; let a and b be the radii of the anterior and posterior surſaces of a lens; let r be the distance of the radiant point, or the focus of incident central rays, and  the distance of the conjugate focus; and let ꝓ be the principal focal distance of the lens, or the ſocal distance of parallel rays. Make : equal to let the same letters, a, &V, r, &e. express the same things for a second lens; and a, b⸗, r, &e. express them for a third; and 50 on. Then we have Im—1 I Im—I1 I 1ImII 5 + ? 7/a  urGaii Therefore when the incident light is parallel, and r infinite, ve have læ n n— Inl . p n 9y3 n VD”p n And when several lenses are contiguous, so that their intervals may be neglected, and thereſore - belonging to the first lens, becomes belonging to the second, we r have a 1II m11II I 74n P2t7 2 I1I m—ImI II I v/]/z 7  t? =+2t7 l m mI m—I1 I I  7  + t©pty5t-t l ? Nothing can be more easily remembered than these formulæ, how numerous soever the glasses may be. Having thus obtained the necessary analysis and formula, it now remains to apply them to the construetion of achromatic lenses; in which it fortunately happens, that the empPloyment of several surfaces, in order to produce the union of the differently reſrangible rays, enables us at the same time to employ them for correcting each others spherical aberration. A white or compounded ray is separated by reſraction into its component coloured rays, and they are diſfused over a small angular spacee Thus it appears, that the glass used by Sir Isaac Newton in his experiments diffused a white ray, which was incident on its posterior surface in an angle of 30°, in such a manner that the extreme red ray emerged into air, making an angle of 500 213 with the perpendicular; the extreme violet ray emerged in an angle of 51° 153; and the ray which was in the confines of green and blue, emerged in an angle oſ 500 485 If the sine of the angle 300 of incidence be called 0, 5, which it really is, the sine of the emergence of the red ray vill be 0,77; that of the violet ray will be 0,78; and that of the intermediate ray vill be O, 774, an exact mean between the two extremes. This ray may therefore be called the mean refrangible ray, and the ratio of T4 to 50, or of 1,55 to 1, vill very properly express the mean refraction of this glass; and we have for this glass mæ1,55. The sine oſ refraction, being measured on a seale, of which the sine oſ incidence occupies 100 parts, will be 154 for the red ray, 155 ſor the mean ray, and 156 for the violet ray. This number, or is ratio to unity, is commonly taken to represent the refractive power of the glass. There is some impropriety in this, unless we consider ratios as measured by their logarithms; for if m be I, the substance does not refract at al. The refractive power can be properly measured only by the refraction which it produces; that is, by the change which , it makes in the direction of the light, or the angle contained between the incident and refracted rays. If two substance produce such deviations always in one proportion, ve should then say that their reſractive powers are in that proportion This is not true in any substances; but the sines of the angles, contained between the refracted ray and the perpendieular, are always in one proportion vhen the angle oſ incidence in both substances is the same. This being a cognisable function oſ the real reſraction, has therefore been assumed as the only convenient measure of the refractive powers. Although it is not strictly just, it answers extremely well in the most usual cases in optical instruments: the refractions are moderate; and the sines are very nearly as the angles contained hetween the rays and the perpendicular; and the real angles oſ refraction, or deflections oſ the rays, are almost exactly proportional to m1I. The most natural and obvious measure of the reſraetive powers would therefore be m I. But this would embarrass some very ſrequent calculations; and we thereſore find it best, on the vhole, to take m itself for the measure of the refractive pover. The separation oſ the red, violet, and intervening rays has been called dispersion; and although this arises merely from a difference of the reſractive power in respeet of the difſerent rays, it is convenient to distinguish this particular modification of the refractive power by a name, md we eall it the DisrERSIVE POwER Oſ ſhe reſracting surstance. l It is susceptible of degrees; for a piece of ſlint glass vill refract the light, so that when the sine of refraction of the red ray is T, the sine of the refraction of the violet ray is nearly 784; or if the sine of refraction of the red ray, measured on a particular scale, is 1,54, the sine oſ refraction of the violet ray is 1,57. The dispersion of this substance, heing measured by the diſſerence of the extreme sines of reſraction, is greater than the dispersion of the other glass, in the proportion of 8 to 2. But this alone is not a suſicient measure of the absolute dispersive power of a substancee Although the ratio of 1,54 to 1,56 remains constant, vhatever the reãl magnitude of the refractions of common glass may be, and though ve thereſore say that its dispersive power is constant, we knov, that by increasing the incidence and the reſraction, the absolute dispersion is also increased. Another substance shows the same properties, and in a particular case may produce the same dispersion; yet it has not for this sole reason the same dispersive power. If indeed the incidence and the refraction of the mean ray be also the same, the dispersive power cannot be said to differ; but if the incidence and the refraction of the mean ray be less, the dispersive power must be considered as greater, though the actual dispersion be the same; because if we increase the incidence till it becomes equal to that in the common glass, the dispersion vill now be increasedl. The proper way of conceiving the dispersion thereſore is, to consider it as a portion of the whole refraction; and if we find a substance making the same dispersion with half the general refraction, ve must say that the dispersive quality is double; because by making the reſraction equal, the dispersion vill really be double. If thereſore we take m as a symbol of the separation of the extreme rays from the middle ray, m I is the natural measure oſ the dispersive power. v. shall expres this Voi.. III 2F in the Leibnitzian notation, thus d , that ve may avoid m the indistinctness which the Newtonian notation would occasion when m is changed for m or m'. It is not unusual for optical writers to take the whole sparation of the red and violet rays for the measure of the dispersive power, and to compare this with the refracting pover with respect to one of the extreme rays. But it is surely better to consider the mean refraction as the measure of the refracting power; and the deviation of either of the extremes ſrom this mean is a proper enough measure of the dispersion, being always halſ of it. It is attended with this convenience, that being introduced into our computations as a quantity infinitely small, and treated as such for the ease of computation, hile it is really a quantity of sensible magnitude; the errors arising ſrom this supposition are diminished greatly, by taking one half of the deviation and comparing it with the mean refraction. This method has, however, this inconvenience, that it does not exhibit at once the reſractive power in all substances respecting any particular colour of light, for it is not the ray of any particular colour that suffers the mean refractionn. In common glass it is the ray which is in the confines of the yellow and blue; in ſlint-glass it is nearly the middle blue ray; and in other substances it is a different ray. These circumstances appear plainly in the different proportions of the colours of the prismatic spectrum exhibited by different substance: This will be considered afterwards, being a great bar to the perfection of achromatic instruments. The vay in which an achromatic lens is constructed, is to make use of a contrary reſraction of a second lens to destroy the dispersion or spherical aberration of the first. The first purpose will be answered if an be equal to . For, in order that the different coloured rays U may be collected into one point by two lenses, it is only ne- perspicuous if we eollect into one view the significations of our various symbols, and the principal equations which we are to employ. I. The ratios to unity of the sines of mean incidence in the different media are m, w, m 2. The ratio of the differences of the sines of dm the extremes - - - TrEu 3S. The ratio nt - - - =c ml 4. The radii of the surfaces a, b; a, b; a', b-. 8BSB. The principal focal distances, or the focal distances of parallel central rays PP, r6. The focal distance of the compound lens P. 7. The distance of the radiant point, or of the ſocus of incident rays on each lens r, ?, . 8. The focal distance of the rays refracted by each lens - - rr.r. 9. The focal distance of rays refracted b the compound lens - - F. I0. The half breadth of the lens e Also the following subsidiary values: L11I1I1 1 T 111 ab8 na]©u n7§Vv m—I rm'ds 2Lmt +-m m+2 S3m +m B 2a/ + / 4 (m V1) 3m +20 i) T And ꝗ and ꝗ must be formed in the same manner from m, a, , ?7; and ſfrom m, a⸗ n, r, as q is formed from m, a, n, r. 8. Also, because in the case of an bjest gla- r - infinitely great, the last term l in all the values or : 7  F : 77 I , vill vanish, and we shall also have F æDP. Thereſore, in a double object-glass, ; And in a lit object-glass HB l + ò Also, in a double object-glass, the correction of spherical aberration requires  +ꝗ p&. And a triple object-glass requires ꝗ +?=v. For the whole error is multiplied by F, and by 4; and therefore the equation which correets this error may be divided by ?? 4 This equation, in the ſrecoſing page, th line from the bottom, giving the value of q, ꝗ, , may be much simplified as follows: In the first place, they may be divided by m, m, or m, by applying them properly to the terms within the parenthesis, and expunging them from This does not alter the values of q, ꝗ, q. In the second place, the whole equations may be afterwards divided by m—I. This will give the values of / and , vhich will still be equal to nothing if + + ꝗ' be equal to nothing. This division reduces the general factor & Ior q o L And in the equation ſor  ve obtain, in place of the I or c. This will al50 be the factor o the value oſf 7 when the third lens is of the same suhstance vith the first, as is generally the case. And, in the third place, since the rays incident on the first lens are parallel, all the terms vanish from the value of q, in which : is found, and there remain only the three first, Perſorming these operations, ve have Let us now apply this investigation to the construction oſ an object-glass; and we shall begin with a double lens. Construction of a Double Achromatic Object-Glass. Here ve have to determine four radii a, b, o', and V. Make n1I. This greatly simplifies the calculus, by exterminating it from all the denominatorss This gives for the equation _ an = 0, the equation d m + _ 850 we have r, the ſocal titonee of the light incident on the second lens, the same vith the principal ſocal distance p of the fſirst lens (neglecting the interval, if any). Now L n/ vhich, in the present case, is = m . Also is  uu (m—1I), and Em1um dm; and we are to find the values of a and , and ſrom them and n 1I to ſind the values of b and V. But it is evidently an indeterminate equation, because there are two unknown quantities; so that there may be an infinity oſ solutions. It must be rendered determinate by means of some other conditions to which it may be subjectedl. These conditions must depend on some other circumstances which may direct our choice. One circumstance oceurs to us which we think of very great consequence. In the passage of light ſrom one substance to another, there is always a considerable portion reflected from the posterior surface of the ſirst, and ſrom the anterior surface oſ the last; and this reflection is more copious in proportion to the reſraction. This loss of light vill therefore be diminished by making the internal surſaces oſ the lenses to coincide; that is, by making b qa'. This will be attended with another advantage. If we put between the glasses a substance of nearly the same reſracting power, we shall not only completely prevent this los of light, but we shall greatly diminish the errors which arise from. an imperfect polish of the surfaces. We have tried this, and find the efſect very surprising The lens being polished immediately after the figure has been given it, and while it vas almost impervious to light by reason of its roughness, which was still sensible to the naked eye, performed as vell as when finished in the finest manner. N. B. This condition, by taking away one refraction, obliges us to increase those which remain, and therefore increases the spherical aberrationss. And since our formula does not fully remove those (by reason of the small quantities neglected in the process), it is uncertain whether this condition be the most eligible We have, however, no direct argument to the contrary. Let us see what determination this gives us. I In this case = I 1. For becaus?e I o b a n ao l i 1l 1I4 5 md n æ1, ve have l +2,, and 7 =2 l. Therel l ? . Matiu fore a5; + I. Therefſore, in our final equation, 1I2 l 1 . 4] put ;2+ l in place of 4 and al in place of I. Ac 3.nbo and it hbecomes Thus have we  el at a common affeeted quadratic EDCæo. equation, where : is the unknown quantity. It has the common form pæ' +qæ  r=0, vhere ꝑ is 5/ AC, ꝗ is equal to 2 CBD, r is equal to E+ D —C, and æ is l equal Io a Divide the equation by ꝓ, and we have 2 4 æ i = O. Make s 5 2 andi æ5 and ve have a2 + 5 æa +1 = O. This gives us ſinally : oræ m8 æ V  5t. This value of lis taken from a scale of vhich the unit is hal the radius of the isosceles lens, which is equivalent to the first lens, or has the same ſocal distance with it. We must then find (on the same scale) the value of b, viæ. LJ t, a vhich is also the value of à9. Having obtained a, we must ſind ' by means oſ the equation I u l and thereaa b l b-io l l fore 1 7] But &u Thereſore L + u, l a + u— I. Thus is our object-glass constructed; and we must deter- mine its focal distance, or its reciprocal - This is  nI u (mI.) All these radii and distances are measured on a scale oſf which n is the unit. But it is more convenient to measure every thing by the focal distance of the compound objectglasss. This gives us the proportion which all the distances bear to itt. Therefore ealling P unity, in order to obtain : on this scale, ve have only to state the analogy mI—u E : : 5 and A iĩs the radius of our first surface measured on a scale of which P is the unit. If, in the formula which expresses the final equation for L the value of ? should he positive, and greater than 4, the equation has imaginary roots; and it ĩs not possible with the glasses employed, and the conditions assumed, to correct both the chromatic and spherical aberrations. If t is negative and equal to  5, the radical part of the value is  O, and Ii1i. But if it be negative or positive, but less than  5, the equation has two real roots, vhich vill give two construetionss. That is to be preſerred which gives the smallest curvature of the surfaces; hecause, since in our formulæ which determine the spherical aberration some quantities are neglected, these quantities are always greater when a large arch (that is, an arch of many degrees) is employed. No radius should be admitted which is much less than ; of the focal distance. All this process will be made plain and easy by an &ample. Very careful experiments have shown, that in common crown-glass the sine of incidence is to the sine of refraction as 1,526 is to l, and that in the generality of flint-glass it is as 1,604 to I. Also that dm V O,6054u. TheremI T 0, S7086. By these numbers we can compute  te coeſſicients oſ our final equation We shall find them as follows : fore m I1æD0,5206; m1 =0,604; c— A=æ2,012 B æ3, 529 C æ 1,360 D æ/~, 520 Eæ 1,8659 The general equation (ꝑ. 455. I. 19.), when subjected to the assumed coincidence of the internal surſaces, is AZB +D2c  54 DC=0. AC0,65; a B +D —2C is =)0,2883; and E +D —C is =m D0,020; 0,652 a 0,288  0,020 æ 0, which corresponds to the equation P æ  ꝗx r=D0. We must now male 0,283 rD2008 0, 55 = 0,484, and t Sũ5508 ,0307. This gives us the ſinal quadratic equation 2 n: 0,0807 = O. To solve this, ve have 3 5 = 0,217, and ; 0,0471. From this take ?, which is = 0,0807 (that is, to 0,0471 add 0,0307), and we obtain 0,0778, the square root of which is  0,2789. Therefore, finally, _ 0,2170 æ 0,2789, which is either 0,4959 or O,0619. It is plain that the first must be preferred, because the second gives a negative radius, or makes the first surſace of If it be intended that the focal distance of the objectglass shall be any number n of inches or feet, ve have only to multiply each oſ the above radii by n, and we have their lengths in inches or ſeet. Thus ve have completed the investigation of the construetion of a double object-glass. Although this was intricate, the final result is abundantly simple for practice, especially with the assistance of logarithms. The only troublesome thing is the preparation of the numerical coefficients A, B, C, D, E of the final equation. Striet attention must also be paid to the positive and negative signs oſ the quantities employed. We might propose other conditions. Thus it is natural to prefer for the first or crown-glass lens such a form as shall give it the smallest possible aberration. This ill require a small aberration of the ſlint-glass to correct it. But a little reflection ill convince us that this form ill not be good. The focal distance of the crown-glass must not exceed one- third of that of the compound glass; these two being nearly in the proportion of d m ad m to d m'. Therefore if this form be adopted, and a be made about 3th oſ b, it will not exceed ;th of P. Thereſore, although ve may produce a most accuratẽ union of the central and marginal rays by opposite aberrations, there will be a considerable aberration of some rays which are between the centre and the margin. 1It is absolutely impossible to colleet into one point the whole rays (though the very remotest rays are united with the central rays), except in a very particular case, vhich cannot obtain in an object-glass; and the small quantities which are neglected in the formula which we have given for the spherical aberration, produce errors which do not follow any proportion of the aperture which can be expressed by an equation of a manageable form. When the aperture is very large, it is better not o correet the aberration for the vhole aperture, but for about ãths of it. When the rays corresponding to this distance are made to cincide with the central rays by means of apposite aberrations, the rays which are beyond this distance will be united with some of those which are nearer to the centre, and the whole diffusion will be considerably diminishedl. Dr Smith has ĩllus trated this in a very perspicuous manner in his theory of Catoptric Microscope. But although we cannot adopt this form of an objecglass, there may be other considerations which may lead us to preſer some particular form of the crown-glass, or of the ſlint-glass. We shall thereſore adapt our general equation a  —4;45S- 2æ E æ0O to this condition. Therefore h express this selected ratio of the two radii of the crown-glass, maing = h (temembering always that a is positive and b negutne in the case oſ a double convex, and h is a negative number.) VWith this condition ve have But when ve make n the unit of our formula of aberration, v E 1. Therefore D and R Now suba a a T/V* stitute this for : in the general equation, and change all the signs (Which still preserves it =0.), and we obtain C D A B t 7TE©VFVpyy r7720 By this equation we are to find or the radius oſ the anterior surface of the flint-glass. The equation is of this ſorm p æ +q æ +r =0, and ve must again make s E (= oland t 7 Therefore s 2 and : C E A 1 - E ) Then, finally, l / 2is/ ]8 2. It may be worth while to take a particular case of this condition. Suppose the erown-glass to be of equal convexities on both sidess. This has some advantages: We can tell with precision whether the curvatures are precisely equal, by measuring the focal distance of rays reſlected back from its posterior surfacee These distances will be precisely equal. Now it is of the utmost importance in the construction of an object-glass, which is to correct the spherical aberration, that the forms be precisely such as are required by our formulæ. In this case of a lens equally convex on both sides a is l , : Substitute this value for 1 in a b a æ the general equation mhi + E æO, and then æ = 4 ; . becomes Now change all the signs, and we have  r& - =0, by which we are to find ?. This in numbers is 1,860 on  0,6044  0. Then s u = 0,3867, mà 1 , o.au Then 3 50,1933; 1 2 =0,0974; and VTSi == 0,6941; s0 that 5 = 0, 1933 4/ 0,6941. This gives two real roots, vi⸗. 0,5874, and  0,5008. If we take the first, we shall have a convex anterior surface for the ſſint-glass, and conse quently a very deep concave for the posterior surſacee W therefore take the second or negative root  0, 50085. We ſind - as before, by the equation vi = : + u = 0, 1046, which will give a large value of b. l l l l . andc 75 and ; is the same as in the former case, viz. O, 1603. Having all these reciprocals, ve may find a, b, à b-, and P; and then dividing them by P, we obtain finally a m O,3206 b 0,3206  D, 3201 v1,583 Pl By comparing this object-glass with the former, e may remark, that diminishing o a little increases b, and in this respect improves the lens. It indeed has diminished b, but this being already considerable, no inconvenience attends this diminution. But we learn, at the same time, that the advantage must be very small; for we cannot diminish a much more, without making it as small as the smallest radius of the object-glass. This proportion is therefore very near the maximum, or best possible; and we know that in such cases, even considerable changes in the radii will make but small changes in the result: for these reasons we are disposed to give a strong preſerencè to the first constrution, on account of the other advantages which we showed to attend it. As another example, ve may take a case which is very nearly the general practice of the London artistss. The radius of curvature for the anterior surſace oſ the convex l crown-glass is àths oſ the radius of the posterior surface, so that h=4. This being introduced into the determinate equation, gives ] a m 0,29988 a —0,3448  0,3526 1,1474 As another condition, ve may suppose that the second or ſlint-glass is of a determined ſorm. This case is solved much in the same mamer as the former. Taking h to represent the ratio of a and V, we have j l Tq This value being substituted in the general equation L2f2 5 , gives us B C D . mirlutm mt = O. This gives for the final equation æ + ææ +t =D0, ma i x ) ma  i.æ 773 We might here take the particular case of the ſſint-glass being equally concave on both sides Then, because ; : . 2l = u, and in the case oſ equal concavities Viurãtui ũ u, it is suſficient to put  iiæ This being ] A B Cu- 0 u done, the equation becomes u & + + E  (r B  0. This gives s 5 +E). We imagine that these cases are suſficient ſor shewing the management oſ the general equation; and the example Vou. III. 2G6 of the numerical solution oſ the first case affords instances of the only niceties which occur in the process, viz. the proper employment of the positive and negative quantities. We have oftener than once observed, that the formula is not perfectly accurate, and that in very large apertures errors will remain. It is proper therefore, vhen we have obtained the form of a compound object-glass, to calculate trigonometrically the progress oſ the light through it; and if we find a considerable aberration, either chromatic or spherical, remaining, ve must make such changes in the curvatures as will correct themm. We have done this for the first example; and we find, that if the focal distance of the compound object- glass be 100 inches, there remains of the spherical aberration nearly 5th of an inch, and the aberration of colour is over-corrected above 3th of an inch. The first aberration has been diminished about 6 times, and the other about 30 times. Both of the remaining errors vill be diminished by increasing the radius of the inner surfaces. This will diminish the aberration oſ the crownglass, and will diminish the dispersion of the flint more than that oſ the crown. But indeed the remaining error is hardly vorth our notice. It is evident to any person conversant with optical discussions, that we shall improve the correetion of the spherical aberration by diminishing the refractions. If we employ two lenses for producing the convergency oſ the rays to a real focus, we shall reduce the aberration to jth. Thereſore a better achromatie glass will be formed of three lenses, two of which are convex and of crown-glass. The refraction being thus divided between them, the aberrations are lessened. There is no occasion to employ two concave lenses of flint-glass; there is even an advantage in using one. The aberration being considerable, less of it will serve for correeting the aberration oſ the crown-glass, and thereſore such a ſorm may be selected as has little aberram. Some light is indeed lost by these two additional surſaces; but this is much more than compensated by the greater apertures which we can venture to give when the curvature oſ the surface is so much diminishedc We proceed therefore to The Construction of u Triple Achromatic Object-Glass. I?T is plain that there are more conditions to be assumed before we can render this a determinate problem, and that the investigation must be more intricate. At the same time, it must give us a much greater variety of construetions, in consequence of our having more conditions necessary for giving the equation this determinate form. Our limits will not allow us to give a full account of all that may be done in this methodc. We shall therefore content ourselves with giving one case, which will sufficiently point out the method of proceeding We shall then give the results in some other eligible cases, as rules to artists by which they may construct such glasses. Let the first and second glasses be of equal curvatures on both sides; the first being a double convex of crown-glass, and the second a double concave of flint-glass. Still making n the unit of our calculus, we have in the first place a m  b,  a', V. Thereſore CG1 , I2 1. Therefore r ” the equation an , dm , amof becomes u I + 7=DO0, or /—I. Let us call this value v. z z , +2 2U4 l) (n1)  2)mI) u 4: ũ cc 3m+1). Our equation now becomes i + C æ0O. 2 This reduced to numbers, by computing the values of 1,81 1,207 ũ  —2,3257 O. This, divided by 1,312, gives s  O,92; and tm 0,2182 4 30,46; 3 0,2116; and VF i  2 O,6781. And, finally, Hi 0,46 æ 0,67l. This has two roots, viz. 0,2181 and  I, 1881. The last would give a very small radius, and is therefore rejected. Nov, proceeding with this value of and the Bi ve get the other radius , and then, by means of u, ve get the other radius, which is common to the four surfaces. the coeſſicients, is P The radii being all on the scale of which n ĩs the unit, they must be divided by P to obtain their value on the scale which has P for its unit. This will give us aq / b, u, 1V, / 0,530 Then, by v 7c, we get the value of P. a = 1,215 bin —/ D0,3046 P l. This is not a very good form, because the last surſace has too great curvature. We thought it worth while to pompue the curvatures for a case where the internal surfaces of the lenses coincidę, in order to obtain the ad vantages mentioned on a former oceasion. The form is as follows: The middle lens is a double concave of flint-glass; the last lens is of crown-gless, and has equal curvatures on both sides. The following table contains the dimensions of the glasses for a variety of focal distances. The first column contains the focal distances in inches; the second contains the radii of the ſfirst surface in inches; the third contains the radii oſ the posterior surface of the first lens and anterior surface oſ the secoꝶũ; and the fourth column has the radii oſ the three remaining surſaces. P a b, a v, a', 12 9,25 6,17 12,76 24 18,38 19,25 25,5 36 27,38 18,25 38,17 485 36,429 24,33 50,92 60 45,42 30,38 63,58 7 54,5 36, 42 76,33 84 63,5 42,5 89, 96 72,6 48,5 101,75 108 81,7 54,55 114,42 120 90,7 60,58 127,17 We have had an opportunity of trying glasses of this construction, and found them equal to any of the same length, although executed by an artist by no means excellent in his profession as a glass-grinder. This very circumstance gave us the opportunity of seeing the good efſects of interposing a transparent substance betweert the glasses. We put some clear turpentine varnish between them, which completely prevented all reflection from the internal surfaces. Accordingly, these telescopes were surprisingly bright; and although the roughness leſt by the first grinding was very perceptible by the naked eye before the glasses were put together, yet when joined in this manner it entirely disappeared, even when the glasses were viewed vith a deep magniſier. The aperture oſ an object-glass of this construction of 0 inches focal distance was 8th inches, which is considerably more than any of Mr Dollond's that we have seen. If we should think it of advantage to make all the three lenses isosceles, that is, equally curved on both surfaces, the general equation vill give the following radii: a + 0,6809 a 0,5280 o- + 0,6418 b V2o,689 V /4+ 0,5285 liv—20, 6413 This seems a good form, having large 1.dii. Should we choose to have the two crown-glass lenses isosceles and equal, ve must make a + 0,6412  —0,52201 a + 0,6412 b0,6412. V 4+ 0,6867 V mDO,6412 This form hardly differs from the last. Our readers vill recollect that all these forms proceed on certain measures of the refractive and dispersive powers of the substances employed, which are expressed by m, m, d m and d m: and ve may be assured that the formulæ are suſficiently exact, by the comparison (which we have made in one of the cases) of the result of the ſformula and the trigonometrical calculation oſ the progress oſ the rays. The error was but 5th of the whole, ten times less than another error, which unavoidably remains, and will be considered presently. These measures of refraction and dispersion were careſully taken; but there is great diversity, particularly in the flint-glasss We are well informed that the manufacture oſ this article has considerably changed oſ late years, and that it is in general less refractive and less dispersive than formerly. This must evidently make a change in the forms oſ achromatic glasses. The proportion oſ the focal distance oſ the crown-glasses to that oſ the flint must be increased, and this will occasion a change in the curvatures, which shall correct the spherical aberrationn We examined with great care a parcel of ſlint-glass which an artist of this city got lately for the purpose oſ making achromatic object-glasses, and also some very white crovn-glass made in Leith, and ve obtained the following measures: 4m2 TELESCOPE. m /l,529 dm I42 m= 1,578 avc 7ũn = 0, 6484. We computed some forms for triple object-glasses made of these glasses, which we shall subjoin as a specimen of the variations which this change oſ data will oceasion. If all the three lenses are made isosceles, ve have a + 0,796 a 0,474 aa = + 0,502  —DO,796  0,474 b 0,502 Or a  O,504 a —0416 a  + 0,793  — 0, 504 V / O,15 V O,798 If the middle lens be isosceles, the two crown- glass lenses may be made of the same form and focal distance, and placed the same vay. This vill give us a + 0,705 a /O,45  + 0,705 b  O,547 V+ 0, 45 V —0,54T N. BThis construction allows a much better fom, if the measures of refraction and dispersion are the same that we used ſormerly. For we shall have a  + 0,628 o —0,579 o  + 0,628 b O,749 V æ + 0,579 b  —DO, 749 ] And this is pretty near the practice of the London opticians. We may here observe, upon the whole, that an amuteur has little chance of sueceeding in these attempts. The diversity oſ glasses, and the uncertainty of the workman's producing the very curvatures which he intends, is so great, that the object-glass turns out different from our expectation. The artist who makes great numbers acquires a pretty certain guess at the remaining error; and having many lenses, intended to be of one form, but unavoidably diſfering a little from it, he tries several of them vith the other two, and finding one better than the rest, he makes use of it to complete the set. The great difficulty in the construction is to find the exportion oſ the dispersive powers of the crown and . 5 flint glass The crown is pretty oonstant; but there is hardly to pots of ſlint-glass which have the same dispersive power. Even if constant, it is diſficult to measure it accurately ; and an error in this greatly aſfects the instrument, because the focal distances of the lenses must be nearly as their dispersive powers The method oſ examining this circumstance, vhich ve found most accurate, vas as folIows: The suns light, or that of a brilliant lamp, passed through a small hole in a board, and fell on another board piereed also with a small holee Behind this was placed a fine prism A (Fig. 15.), which formed a spectrum ROV on a sereen pierced with a small holee Behind this was placed a prism B of the substance under examination. The ray which was refracted by it fell on the vall at D, and the distance oſ its illumination from that point to C, on which an unreſracted ray would have fallen, was careſully measured. This showed the refraction of that colour. Then, in order that we might be certain that we always compared the refraction of the same precise colour by the different prisms placed at B, ve marked the precise position oſ the prism A when the ray of a partieular colour fell on the prism B. This was done by an index AG attached to A, and turning with it, when ve caused the diſferent colours of the spectrum formed by A to ſall on B. Having examined one prism B with respect to all the colours in the spectrum formed by A, ve put another B in its place. Then bringing A to all its former positions successively, by means oſ a graduated arch HGE, ve were certain that when the index was at the same division of the aroh it was the very ray which had been made to pass through the first prism B in a former experiment. We did not solicitously endeavour to find the very extreme red and violet rays; because, although ve did not learn the whole dispersions of the two prisms, we learned their proportions, which is the circumstance wanted in the construction oſ achromatic glasses. It is in vain to attempt this by measuring the speetrums themselves; ſor we cannot be certain of selecting the very same colours ſo the comparison, because they succeed in an insensible grdation. The intelligent reader will readily observe, that we have hitherto proceeded on the supposition, that vhen, by means of contrary refractions, ve have united the extreme red mi violet rays, we have also united all the otherss But this is quite gratuitous. Sir Isaac Newton vould, however, har made the same supposition; ſor he imagined that the diſferent colours divided the speetrum ſormed by all substanc in the proportions of a musical canonn. This is a mistake When a spectrum is formed by a prism oſ erown-glass, and another of precisely the same length is formed by the side of it by a prism oſ flint-glass, the confine between the gre and blue vill be found precisely in the middle of the first spectrum, but in the second it will be considerably nearer to the red extremity. In short, diſferent substances do not disperse the colours in the same proportion. The effect of this irrationality (so to call it) of dispersion, vill appear plainly, we hope, in the following manner: Let A (Fig. 12.) represent a spot of white solar light ſalling perpendicularly on a wal. Suppose a prism oſ common glass placed behind the hole through which the light is admitted, with its refracting angle ſacing the leſt hand. It vill refract the beam of light to the right, and will at the same time disperse this heterogeneous light into its component rays, carrying the extreme red ray from A to R, the extreme orange ſrom A to O, the extreme yellow from A to Y, &e. and vill form the usual prismatic spectrum ROYGBPVC. If the whole length RC be divided into 1000 parts, e shall have (hen the whole reſraction AR is small) RO very nearly 125, RY200, RG/33, RE 500, RP/667, RV7S, and RC1000; this being the JIroportion observed in the differences oſ the sines of reſrachy Sir Isaac Newton. l Perhaps a refracting medium may be found such, that a prism made oſ it would refract the white light from A, in the upper line of this figure, in such a manner that a speetrum ROYGBPVC shall be formed at the same distance from A, and of the same length, but divided in a different proportionn. We do not know that such a medium has been found; but ve know that a prism oſ ſlint-glass has its reſractive and dispersive powers so constituted, that i? AH be taken about 3d of AR, a spot of white light, formed by rays falling perpendicularly at H, will be so refracted and dispersed, that the extreme red ray vill be earried from H to R, and the extreme violet ſfrom H' to C, and the intermediate colours to intermediate points, forming a speetrum resembling the other, but having the colours more constipated towards R', and more dilated towards C; so that the ray which the common glass carried to the middle point B of the spectrum RC is now in a point B of the spectrum RC, considerably nearer to R.. Dr Blair has found, on the other hand, that certain fluids, particularly such as contain the muriatic acid, vhen formed into a prism, vill refract the light from H (in the lower line) so as to form a spectrum R'C equal to RC, and as ſar removed from A' as RC is ſfrom A, but having the colours more dilated toward R', and more constipated toward C, than is observed in RC; so that the ray which was carried by the prism oſ common glass to the middle point B is carried to a point B/, considerably nearer to C. Let us now suppose that, instead of a white spot at A, ve have a prismatic spectrum AB (Fig. 18.), and that the prism of common glass is applied as before, immediately behind the prism which forms the speetrum AB. We know that this ill be refracted sidewise, and will make a spectrum ROYGBPC, inclined to the plane of refraction in an angle of 45; so that drawing the perpendicular RC, we have RCæc C. We also know that the prism of ſlint-glass vould refract the spectrum formed by the first prism on EHF, in such a manner that the red ray will go to R, the violet  C, and the intermediate rays to points o, v, , b, p, v, 0 situated that O o is= RO of the other figure; Y y is=RY oſ that figure, G  Rũ, &e. These points must therefore lie in a curve R oyg b p v C, which is convex tovard the axis RCIn like manner ve may be assured that Dr Blair's fiuid vill ſform a spectrum R o 5 &V p, v C, concave tovard RC. Let it be observed by the way, that this is a very good method for discovering whether a medium disperses the light in the same proportion with the prism which is employed for forming the first spectrum AB or EF. It disperses in the same or in a different proportion, according as the oblique spectrum is straight or crooked; and the exaet proportion corresponding to each colour is had by measuring the ordinates of the curves R b C or R V C. Having formed the oblique spectrum RBC by a prism of common glass, ve know that an equal prism of the same glass, placed in a contrary position, ill bring back all the rays from the spectrum RBC to the spectrum AB, laying each colour on its former place. In like manner, having formed the oblique spectrum R B C by a prism of ſint-glass, ve know that another prism of ſlint-glass, placed in the opposite direction, will bring all the rays back to the spectrum EHF. But having formed the oblique spectrum RBC by a prism of common glass, iſ we place the ſlint-glass prism in the contrary position, it will bring the colour R hak to E, and the colour C to F; but it will not bring the colour B to H, but to a point h, such that B A is equil to b H, and 5 B to h H. In like manner, the other lours vill not be brought back to the straight lIine EHF, but to a curve Eh F, forming a crooked spectrum. In like manner, the fluids discovered by Dr Blair, when employed to bring back the oblique spectrum RBC formed by common glass, will bring its extremities back to E and F, and form the crooked spectrum E à F lying beyond EHF. This experiment evidently gives us another method for examining the proportionality oſ the dispersion of different s ubstances. Having, by common glass, brought back the oblique spectrum formed by common glass to its natural place AB, suppose the original spectrum at AB to contract gradually (as Newton has made it do by means of a lens), it 3s plain that the oblique spectrum will also contract, and so vill the second spectrum at AB; and it will at last coalesce into a white spot. The eſſect will be equivalent to a gradual compression of the whole figure, by which the parallel lines AR and BC gradually approach, and at last unite. In like manner, hen the oblique spectrum formed by flint-glass is brought back to EHF by a ſlint-glass prism, and the figure compressed in the same gradual manner, all the colours vill coalesce into a white spot. But when ſlint-glass is employed to bring back the oblique spectrum formed by common glass, it forms the crooked spectrum E h F. Novw let the figure be compressed. The curve E h F will be doubled down on the line H h, and there will be formed a compound spectrum H h, quite unlike the common spectrum, heing purple or claret coloured at H by the mixture of the extreme red and violet, and green edged with blue at h by the mixture of the green and hluee The fluid prisms would in like manner form a spectrum of the same kind on the other side of H. This is precisely what is observed in achromatic objectglasses made of crown-glass and flint: for the refraction from A to R corresponds to the reſraction of the convex crown-glass; and the contrary reſraction from R to E corresponds to the contrary refraction oſ the concave ſlint- glass, which still leaves a part of the first refraction, producing a convergence to the axis of the telescope. It ĩs found to give a purple or wine-coloured focus, and within this a green one, and between these an imperſect white. Dr Blair found, that when the eye-glass vas drawn out beyond its proper distance, a star was surrounded by a green fringe, by the green end of the spectrum, which crossd each other within the focus; and when the eye-glass  s too near the object-glass, the star had a wineeoloured fringe. The green rays were ultimately most reſracted N. B. We should expeet the fringe io be of a blue colour rather than a greenn. But this is easily explained: The extreme violet rays are very ſaint, so as hardly to be sensible; therefore when a compound glass is made as achromatic as possible to our senses, in all probability (nay certainly) these almost insensible violet rays are left out, and perhaps the extreme colours which are united are the red and the middle violet rays. This makes the green to he the mean ray, and therefore the most outstanding vhen the dispersions are not proportional. Dr Blair very properly calls these speetrums, H & and H V, secondary spectrums, and seems to think that he is the ſirst who has taken notice of them. But Mr Clairault was too accurate a mathematician, and too careful an observer, not to be aware oſf a cireumstance which was of primary consequence to the whole inquiry. He could not but observe that the success rested on this very particular, and that the proportionality oſ dispersion was indispensably necessary. This subject was therefore touched on by Clairault; and sully discussed by Boscovich, first in his Dissertations published at Vienna in 1759; then in the Comment. Bononiensis; and, lastly, in his Opuscula, published in 17655. Dr Blair, in his ingenious Dissertation on Achromatic Glasses, read to the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1795, ams not to have known of the labours oſ these writers; speaks of it as a new discovery; and exhibits some oſ the consequences of this principle in a singular point of view, as something very paradoxical and inconsistent with the usually received notions on these subjectss But they are by no means so. We are, however, much indebted to his in genious researches, and his successful endeavours to ſind some remedy for this imperfection of achromatic glasses. Some of his contrivances are exceedingly ingenious; but had the Doctor consulted these writers, he would have saved himselſ a good deal of trouble. Boscovich shows how to unite the two extremes with the most outstanding colour of the secondary spectrum, by means of a third substancee. When we have done this, the aberration occasioned by the secondary spectrums must be prodigiously diminished; for it is evidently equivalent to the union of the points H and h of our figuree Whatever cause produces this must diminish the curvature of the arches Eh and  F: but even if these curvatures vere not diminished, their greatest ordinates cannot exceed th of H h; and ve may say, without hesitation, that by uniting the mean or most outstanding ray with the two extremes, the remaining dispersion will be as much less than the uncorrected eolour of Dollond's achromatic glass, as this is less than four times the dispersion of a common objectglass. It must thereſore be altogether insensible. Boscovich asserts, that it is not possible to unite more than two colours by the opposite refraction of two substances, which do not disperse the light in the same proportions. Dr Blair makes light of this assertion, as he ſinds it made in general terms in the extract made by Priestley ſrom Boscovich in his Essay on the History of Opties; but had he read this author in his own dissertations, he would have seen that he was perſectly right. Dr Blair, however, has hit on a very ingenious and effectual method of producing this union of three colourss. In the same way as we correct the dispersion of a concave lens of crown-glass by the opposite dispersion of a concave lens of fint-glas we may correct the secondary dispersion oſ an achromati convex lens by the opposite secondary dispersion oſ a achromatic eoncave lenss But the intelligent reader will observe, that this union does not contradict the assertion of Boscovich, because it ĩs necessurily produced by means of three refracting substances. The most essential service which the public has recĩved at the hands of Dr Blair is the discovery of fluid mediums of a proper dispersive power. By composing the lenses oſ such substances, we are at once ſreed from the irregularities in the reſraction and dispersion of ſlint-glass, which the chemists have not been able to free it from. In whatever way this glass is made, it consists of parts which diſfer both in refractive and dispersive power; and when taken up from the pot, these parts mix in threads, which may hæ disseminated through the mass in any degree oſ finenes. But they still retain their properties; and when a piece of flint-glass has been formed into a lens, the eye, placed in its ſocus, sees the whole surface oceupied by glistening threads or broader veins running across it. Great rewards have been offered for removing this defeet, but hitherto to no purpose. We beg leave to propose the following method: Let the glass be reduced to powder, and then melted with a great proportion of alkaline salt, so as to make a liquor silicum. When precipitated from this by an acid, it must be in a state of very uniform composition. Iſ again melted into glass, we should hope that it would be free from this defect; if not, the case seems to be desperate. But by using a fluid medium, Dr Blair was freed from all this embarrassment; and he acquired another immens advantage, that of adjusting at pleasure both the refractive and dispersive powers of his lenses. In solid lenses, ve do not know whether we have taken the curvatures suited © the reſractions till our glass is finished; and if we have mistaken the proportions, all our labour is los. But when fluids are used, it is enough that we know nearly the refractions. We suit our focal distances to these, and then select our curvatures, so as to remove the aberration of figure, preserving the focal distances. Thus, by properly tempering the fluid mediums, ve bring the lens to agree precisely with the theory, perfectly achromatic, and the aberration of figure as much corrected as is possible. Dr Blair examined the refractive and dispersive povers of a great variety of substances, and found great varieties in their actions on the different colours. This is indeed what every well-informed naturalist would expect. There ĩs no doubt now among naturalists about the mechanical connexion of the phenomena of nature; and all are agreed that the chemical actions of the particles of matter are perfectly like in kind to the action of gravitating bodies; that all these phenomena are the effects oſ forces like those which we call attractions and repulsions, and which we observe in magnets and electriſied bodies; that light is refracted by forces of the same kind, but differing chieſly in the small extent of their sphere oſ activity. One who views things in this way will expect, that as the actions of the same acid for the different alkalis are diſferent in degree, and as the diſferent acids have also diſferent actions on the same alkali, in like manner different substances diſfer in their general refractive powers, and also in the proportion of their action on the different colourss Nothing is more unlikely thereſore than the proportional dispersion of the different colours by different substances; and it is surprising that this inquiry has been so long delayed. It is hoped that Dr Blair will oblige the public with an account of the experiments which he has made. This will enable * A very ſull series of experiments on this subject will be found in Dr Brewster's Treatise on new Philosophical Instruments, p. S15, and in the Edinburgh Transactions, vol. VIII p. I. Vou. III. H others to c-operate in the improvement of achromatic glasses. We camnot derive much knowledge from what he has already published, because it was chieſly with the intention of giving a popular, though not an accurate vew oſ the subject. The constructions which are there mentioned are not those vhich he found most effectual, but those which would be most easily understood, or demonstrated by the slight theory which is contained in the disertation; besides, the manner of expressing the diſſerenœ of refrangibility, perhaps chosen for its paradoxieal appearance, does not give us a clear notion of the characteristic differences oſ the substances examined. Those rays which are ultimately most deflected from their direction, are mid to have become the most refrangible by the comhination of different substances, although, in all the partieular refrations by which this effect is produeed, they are less reſracted than the violet lightt. We can just gather this much, that common glass disperses the rays in such a manner, that the ray which is in the confine of the green and hlue oceupies the middle of the prismatio speetrum; but in glasses, and many other substances, which are more dispersive, this ray is nearer to the ruddy extremity oſ the speetrum. While therefore the straight line RC (Fig. 18) terminates the ordinates O o, YY, G&, &e. which repre sent the dispersion of common glass, the ordinates which express the dispersions of these substances are terminatei by a curve passing through R and C, but lying below the line RC. When therefore parallel heterogeneous light is made to converge to the axis of a convex lens of common glass, as happens at F in Fig. 8. the light is dispersed, and the violet rays have a shorter focal distance. IF we now apply a concave lens oſ greater dispersive power, the red and violet rays are brought to one focus ; but the green rays, not being so much refracted avay from F, are left behind at 9, and have now a shorter focal distance. But Dr Blair aſterwards found that this was not the case ũ ſimes; and we found the field of vision as uniſormly distinet as with Dollond's 42 inch telescope magnifying 46 times. The intelligent reader must admire the nice figuring and centering of the very deep eye-glasses which are necessary for this amplification. It is to be hoped that Dr Blair will extend his views o glasses of different compositions, and thus give us objectglasses which are solid; for those composed of fluids have inconveniences which will hinder them from coming into general use, and vill confine them to the museums of philosophers. We imagine that antimonial glasses bid fair to answer this purpose, if they could be made ſree of colour, s0 as to transmit enough of light. We recommend this dissertation to the careful perusal of our readers. Thos who have not made themselves much acquainted with the delicate and abstruse theory of aberrations, will find it exhihited in such a popular form as vill enable them to understand its general aim; and the well-informed reader vill find many curious indications of inquiries and discoveries yet to be made. We now proceed to consider the eye-glasses or glasses of telescopes. The proper construction of an eye-piece is not less essential than that of the object-glass But our limits vill not allow us to treat this subject in the same detail We have already extended this article to a great length, because we do not know of any performance in the English language which will enable our readers to understand the construction of achromatic telescopes; an invention which reflects honour on our country, and has completed the dicoveries oſf our illustrious Newton. Our readers will find abundant information in Dr Smith's Optics concerning the eye-glasses, chieſly deduced from Huyghens's fine theory of sberration. At the same time,. ve must again pay Mr i e thus repeatedly speak of the theory of spherical aberng from Mr Huyghens, we must not omit giving a due I. Draw the perpendicular a  to the axis, meeting the incident ray in 7, and à A'to the centre of the lenss. The reſracted ray BF is parallel to  A: for R a:  A (m Ra: a A) =BRB: BF  RA: AF), which is the ſocal theorem. 2. An oblique pencil BP b proceeding from any point P vhich is not in the axis, is collected to the point f, where the refracted ray BF cuts the line PAf dravn from P through the centre of the lens: for P à:  A=PB: B, vhich is also the focal theorm. The Galilean telescope is susceptible of so little improvement, that we need not employ any time in illustrating its performance. The simple astronomical telescope is represented in Fig. 16. The beam of parallel rays, inclined to the axis, is made to converge to a point G, where it forms an image of the lowest point of a very distant object. These rays decussaling from G fſall on the eye-glass; the ray from the lowest point B of the object-glass ſalls on the eyeglass at b; and the ray from A fſalls on a; and the ray from the centre O falls on o. These rays are rendered parallel, or nearly so, by refraction through the eye-glass, and take the direction b i, oI, a i. If the eye be placed so that this pencil of parellel rays may enter it, they converge to a point of the retina, and give distinet vision of the lowest point of the object. It appears inverted, because the rays by which we see its lowest point come in the direetion which, in simple vision, is connected with the upper point of an object. They come from above, and therefore are thought to proceed from abovee We see the point as if situated in the diretion Io. In like manner the eye placed at I, sees the uppr point of the object in the direction IP, and its middle in the direction IE. The proper place for the eye is I: if brought much nearer the glass, or removed much farther m it, some, or the whole, of this extreme pencil of rays ot enter the pupil. It is thereſore of importance to determine this point. Because the eye requires parallel rays ſor distinet vision, it is plain that F must be the principal focus oſ the eye-glasss Therefore, by the common focal theorem OF: OE æ OE: OL or OF: FE æ OE: EI. The magniſying power being measured by the magnitude oſ the visual angle, compared with the magnitude of the o IF oOF the measure of the magnifying power. This is very nearly DOE OF E Fr visual angle with the naked eye, we have alg or ſor As the line OE, joining the centres of the lenses, and perpendicular to their surfaces, is called the axis of the telescope, so the ray OG is called the axis of the oblique pencil, being really the axis of the cone of light which has the object-glass for its basee This ray is through ĩts whole course the axis oſ the oblique pencil; and when its course is determined, the amplification, the field of vision, the apertures oſ the glasses, are all determined. For this purpose we have only to consider the centre of the object-glass as a radical point, and trace the process of a ray from this point through the other glasses: this will be the axis oſ some oblique pencil. It is evident, thereſore, that the field of vision depends on the breadth of the eye,glass Should ve increase this, the extreme pencil will pass through I, because O and I are still the conjugate foci oſ the eye-glass On the other hand, the angle resolved on for the extent or ſield of vision gives the breadth of the eye-glass. l We may here observe, by the way, that ſor all optieal instruments there must he two optical ſigures considered. The fſirst shews the progress of a pencil of rays coming ſrom one point of the object. The various focusses of this pencil show the places of the diſferent images, real or virtual. Such a figure is formed by the three rays AG a i, OG o I, BG bi. The second shows the progress of the axes of the different pencils proceeding through the centre of the object-glas. The focusses oſ this pencil of axes show the places where an image of the object-glass is formed; and this pencil determines the field of vision, the apertures of the lenses, and the amplification or magniſying power. The three rays OG o I, OFEI, OHPI, form this figure. See also ſig. 24. where the progress of both sets of pencils is more diversiſied. The perfection of a telescope is to represent an object in its proper shape, distinctly magniſfied, with a great field of vision, and suſficiently brightt. But there are limits to all these qualities; and an increase of one of them, for the most part, diminishes the rest. The brightness depends on the aperture of the objeet-glass, and vill increase in the same proportion (because i i' will always be to AB in the proportion of EF to FO), till the diameter of the emergent pencil is equal to that of the pupil of the eye. Increasing the object. glass any more ean send no more light into the eye. But we cannot make the emergent pencil nearly so large as this vhen the telescope magnifies much; ſor the great aperture of the object-glass produces an indistinet image at GF, and indistinctness is magnified by the eyeglass. A great ſield of vision is incompatible with the true snape of the object; for it is not strietly true that all rays flowing from O are refracted to I. Those rays which go to the margin of the eye-glass cross the axis between E and I; and therefore they eross it at a greater angle than if they passed through I. Now had they really passed through I, the object would have been represented in its due proportions. Therefore since the angles of the marginal parts are enlarged by the aberration of the eye-glass, the marginal parts themselves will appear enlarged, or the nbject appear distortedl Thus, a chessboard viewed ugh a reading-glass appears drawn out at the corners, and the straight lines are all changed into curves, as is represented in fig. 1S. The circumstance which most peremptorily limits the extent of field is the necessary distinctness. If the vision be indistinet, it is useless, and no other quality can compensate this deſeet. The distortion is very inconsiderable in much larger angles of vision than we ean admit, and is unworthy of the attention paid to it by optical writers. They have been induced to take notice of it, because the means of correcting it in a eonsiderable degree are attainable, and afford an opportunity of exhibiting their knowledge; whereas the indistinctness which accompanies a large field ĩs a subjcet of most diſficult discussion, and has hitherto baſſled all their efforts to express by any intelligible or ranageable formulæ. This subject must, however, be consideredl. The image at GF oſ a very remote ohject is not a plain surface perpendicular to the axis of the telescope, but is nearly spherical, having O for its centree. IF a number of pencils of parallel rays crossing each other in I fall on the eye-glass, they vill form a picture on the opposite side, in the focus F. But this picture will by no means be flat, nor nearly 80, but very concave towards E. Its exact form is oſ most difficult investigation. The elements of it are given by Dr Barrow; and we have given the chief of them in the article Orrics, when considering the foci of infinitely slender pencils of oblique rays. Therefore it is impossible that the picture formed by the object-glass can be seen distinetly in all its parts by the eye-glass Even if it were ſlat, the points G and H (Fig. 16.) are too far from the eyeglass when the middle V is at the proper distance for distinet visionn. When, therefore, the telescope is so adjusted that we have distinet vision of the middle of the field, in order to see the margin distinctly we must push in the eyeglass: and having so done, the middle of the field becomes indistinctt. When the fſield oſ vision exceeds 12 or 15 de- grees, it is not possible by any contrivance to make it olerably distinct all over; and we must turn the telescope successively to the diſferent parts of the field that e may seœ them agreeably. The cause of this indistinctness is, as e have already said, the shortness of the lateral foci of lateral and oblique pencils refracted by the eye-glass. The common determination of these is not complete, and relates only to thoæ rays which are on a plane passing through the axis oſ the lens But the oblique pencil b Ga, by which an eye placed at I sees the point G of the image, is a cone of light, having a circular base on the eye-glass; of which circle a b is one of the diameterss There is a diameter perpendicular to this, which, in this figure, is represented by the pont o. Fig. I7. represents the base oſ the cone as seen hy an eye placed in the axis of the telescope, with the object-glass as appearing behind it. The point b is ſormed by a ray which comes from the lowest point B of the object-glass, and the point a is illuminated by a ray from A The point e at the right-hand of the circular base of this cone of light came from the point C on the leſt side of the object-glass; and the light comes to d from D. Novw the laws of opties demonstrate, that the rays which come through the points and d are more convergent aſter refraction than the rajs which come through o and 5. The analogies, thereſore, which ascertain the foci of rays lying in the planes passing through the axis do not determine the foci of the others Of this we may he sensible by looking through a lens to a ſigure on which are drawn concentric circles crossed by radii. When the telescope is so adjusted that we see ditinctly the extremity of one of the radii, we shall not se distinetly the circumference which crosses the extremity with equal distinetness, and vice versa. This difference, however, between the foci of the rays which come through a and b, and those which come through c and d, is not considerable in the ſields of vision,' which are otherwise ad- missiblee But the same difference of foci obtains also with respect to the dispersion of light, and is more remarkable. Both d'Alembert and Euler have attempted to introduce it into their formulæ; but they have made them useless for any practical purpose by their inextricable complication. This must serve as a general indication of the diſficulties which occur in the construction of telescopes, even although the object-glass were perſect, ſorming an image without the smallest confusion or distortion. There is yet another difficulty or imperſection. The rays of the pencil a G b, when refracted through the eyeglass, are also separated into their component colourss The edge of the lens must evidently perform the oſſice of a prism, and the vhite ray G b will belso dispersed that if b ĩ be the path oſ its red ray, the violet ray, vhich makes another part of it, will take such a course b n that the angle i'bn vill be nearly /,th of G bĩ. The ray G a passing through a part oſ the lens whose surfaces are less inclined to each other, vill be less reſracted, and ill be less dispersed in the same proportion very nearly. Therefore the two violet rays vill be very nearly parallel vhen the two red rays are rendered parallel. Hence it must happen, that the object will appear bordered with coloured fringes. A black line seen near the margin on a white ground vill have a ruddy and orange border on the outside and a blue border within: and this confusion is altogether independent on the object-glass and is 50 much the greater as the visual angle b IE is greater. Such are the diſficulties: They would be insurmountable were it not that some of them are so connected that, to a certain extent, the diminution of one is accompanied by a diminution of the other. These curves are the geometrical loci of the foci of infinitely slender pencils. Consequently the point G is very nearly in the caustic formed by à beam of light consisting of rays parallel to I o, and occupying the whole surſace oſ the eye-glass, because the pencil of rays vhich are collected at G is very small. Any thing therefore that diminishes the mutual inclination of the adjoining rays puts their concourse farther oſ. Now this is precisely what we want: for the point G of the image formed by the object-glass is already beyond the focus of the oblique slender pencil of parallel rays i a and i b; and, therefore, it we could make this focus go a little ſarther from a and b, ve shall bring it nearer to G, and obtain more distinct vision of this point of the objectt. Now let it be recollected, that in moderate refractions through prisms, two rays which are inclined to each other in a small angle are, aſter refraction, inclined to each other in the same anglee. Therefore, if we can diminish the aberration of the ray a i, or o I, or b, we diminish their mutual inclination; and consequently the mutual inclination of the rays G a, G o, GV, and therefore lengthen the focus, and get more distinct vision of the point G. Thereſore we at once correct the distortion and the indistinctness: and this is the aim of Mr Huyghens's great principle of dividing the refractions. The general method is as follows: Let o be the objectglass (Fig. 19.) and E the eye-glass of a telescope, and F their common focus, and FG the image formed by the object-glasss. The proportion of their focal distances is supposed to he such as gives as great a magniſying power as the perſection of the object-glass will admit. Let BI be the axis of the emergent pencil. It is known by the focal theorem that GE is parallel to BI: therefore BGE is the whole refraction or deflection of the ray OHB from its former direction. Let it be proposed to diminish the aberrations by dividing this into two parts by means of two glasses D and e, s0 as to make the ultimate angle of vision b i e equal to BIE, and thus retain the same magniſying power and visible field. Let it be proposed to divide it into the parts BGC and CGE. From G drav any line GD to the axis towards O; and l draw the perpendicular DH, cutting OG in H; draw H parallel to GC, cutting GD in ; drav g f perpendieular to the axis; and ge parallel to GE; drav e b perpendicular to the axis; draw D parallel to GC, and d perpendicular to the axis. Then if there be placed at D a lens whose focal distance is D d, and another at è, whose focal distance is e f;, the thing is donee. The ray OH vill be reſracted into H b, this into b ĩ parallel to BI. The demonstration of this construetion is so evident by means of the common focal theorem, that we need not repeat it, nor the reason for its advantages. We have the same magnifying power, and the same field of vision; we have less aberration, and thereſore less distortion and indistinctness; and this is brought about by a lens HD of a smaller aperture and a greater focal distance than BE. Consequently, if we are contented with the distinctness of the margin of the field with a single eye-glass, ve may greatly increase the field of vision: for iſ we increase DH to the size of EB we shall have a greater field, and much greater distinctness in the margin; because HD is of a longer focal distance, and vill bear a greater aperture, preserving the same distinctness at the edge. On this account the glass HD is commonly called the Field-glass. It must be observed here, however, that although the distortion of the object is lessened, there is a real distortion produced in the image ſ & But this, vhen magnified by the glass e, is smaller than the distortion produced by the glass E, of greater aperture and shorter focus, on the undistorted image GF. But because there is a distortion in the second image ſ 5, this construction cannot he used for the telescopes of astronomical q uadrants, and other graduated instruments; because then equal divisions of the micrometer would not correspond to equal angles. But the same construetion will answer in this case, by taking the point D on that side of F which is remote from O (Fig. 200 This is the form now employed in tæ telescopes of all graduated instruments. The exact proportion in which the distortion and the indistinctness at the edges of the ſield are diminished by this construction, depends on the proportion in which the angle BGE is divided by GC; and is of pretty diſficult investigation. But it never deviates ſar (never à in optical instruments) from the proportion of the squares of the angle We may, without any sensible error, suppose it in this proportionn. This gives us a practical rule of easy recolletion, and of most extensive use. When we vould diminish an aberration by dividing the whole reſraction into two parts, ve shall do it most eſfectually by making them equal. In like manner, if we divide it into three paris by means oſf two additional glasses, ve must make each p of the whole; and so on for a greater number. This useſul problem, even when limited, as ve have done, to equal reſractions, is as yet indeterminate; that is, susceptible of an infinity of solutions: for the pont D, where the field-glass is placed, was taken at pleasure; yet there must be situations more proper than otherss The aberrations which produee distortion, and those which produce indistinctness, do not follow the same proportions To correct the indistinctness, we should not select such psitions of the lens HD as vill give a small focal distance io be; that is, ve should not remove it very far from F. Huyghens recommends the proportion of 8 to I for that of the focal distances of the lens HD and e b, and says that the distance D e should be 2 Fe. This puts f too ne to HD, and thus shows the dust on HD. This will make ei 2de F, and will divide the whole refraction into two equal parts, as any one vill readily see by construeting the common optical figure Mr Shert, the celebrated improver of reflecting telescopes, generally employed this proportion; and ve shall presently see that it is a very good one. It has been already observed, that the great refractions which take place on the eye- glasses oceasion very considerable dispersions, and disturb the vision by fringing every thing with colourss To remedy this, achromatie eye-glasses may be employed, constructed by the rules already delivered. This construction, however, is incomparably more intrieate than that oſ object-glasses: for the equations must involve the distance of the radiant point, and be more complicated: and this complication is immensely increased on account of the great obliquity of the pencils. Most fortunately the Huyghenian construction of an eyepiece enables us to correct this dispersion to a great degree of exactness. A heterogeneous ray is dispersed at H, and the red ray belonging to it falls on the lens bæe at a greater distance from the centre than the violet ray coming from H. It vill therefore be less refracted (cæteris puribus) by the lens bæ; and it is possible that the difference may be such that the red and violet rays dispersed at H may be rendered parallel at b, or even a little divergent, so as to unite accurately with the red ray at the bottom of the eye. How this may be effected, by a proper selection of the places and figures of the lenses, will appear by the following proposition, vhich we imagine is nev and not inelegant: Let the compound ray OP (Fig. 21) be dispersed by the lens PC; and let PV, PR be its violet and red rays, cutting the axis in G and . It is required to place another lens RD in their way, so that the emergent rays R r, V u, shall be parallel Produce the incident ray OP to Z. The angles ZPR, ZPV, are given, (and RPV is nearly— as and the intersections G and  with the axis. Let F be the focus of parallel red light coming through the lens RD in the opposite direction. Then (by the common optical theorem), the perpendicular Fe will cut PR in such a point,, that t F vill be parallel to the emergent ray R7 and to Vo. Thereſore if ? D cut PV in u, and uf be dravn perpendicular to the axis, we shall have (also by the common therem) the point f for the focus of violet rays, and DF: Dſ =De: D u—/28: 27 nearly, in a given ratio. The problem is thereſore reduced to this:  To drav from a point D in the line CG a line De, which shall be cut by the lines PR and PV in the given ratio. The following construction naturally offers itsel?: Make GM: 2M in the given ratio, and drav MK parallel to Pę. Through any point D of CG drav the straight line PDE, cutting MK in K Join GK, and drav De parallel to G. This will solve the problem; and, drawing e F perpendicular to the axis, ve shall have F for the focus oſ the lens RD for parallel red rays. The demonstration is evident; for MK being parallel to P4, ve have GM:  M  GK: HE, /t¢ D,: u D/FD : D, in the ratio required. This problem admits of an infinity of solutions; because the point D may be taken any where in the line CG. It may therefore be subjected to such conditions as may produce other advantages. I. Tt may be restricted by the magnifying power, or by the division which we choose to make of the whole refraction which produces this magnifying power. Thus, if we have resolved to diminish the aberrations by making the two refractions equal, we have determined the angle Rr D. Therefore drav GK, making the angle MGK equal to that which the emergent pencil must make with the axis, n order to produce this magniſying power. Then drav MK parallel to P 4, meeting GK in K. Then drav PE, cutting the axis in D, and D; parallel to GK, and , F perpendicular to the axis. D is the place, and DF the focal distance of the eye-glass. 2. Particular circumstances may cause us to fix on a particular place D, and we only want the focal distancee In this case the ſirst construction suſfices. 3S. We may have determined on a certain focal distance DF, and the place must be determined. In this case let GF: F. I: tan. G Fe : fu=/I:m, m being—/I su: fg tan. g: l then GF: fg= tan. g: m tan. G then GF—ſg: GF æ tan. 7//m tan. G: tan. g or Gg+Fſ: GF  tan. 7m tan. G: tan. g; ani GFG ⸗ + Eſ &n ũ fore given, and the place of F is determined; and since FD is given by supposition, D is determined. The application of this problem to our purpose is diſficult, if ve take it in the most general terms; but the nature of the thing makes such limitations that it becomes very ensy. In the case of the dispersion of light, the angle GPy” is 50 small that MK may be drawn parallel to PG without any sensible error. If the ray OP were parallel to CG, then G would be the focus of the lens PC, and the point M would ſall on C; because the focal distance oſ red rays is to that of violet rays in the same proportion for every lens, and therefore CGG: Cu  DF: D. Nov, in a telescope which magnifies considerably, the angle at the objectglass is very small, and CG hardly exceeds the ſocal distance; and CG is to Cę very nearly in the same proportion oſf 28 to 27. We may thereſore drav through C (Fig. 21.) a line CK parallel to PG: then drawv GK perpendicular to the axis of the lenses, and join PK'; drav KBE parallel to CG, cutting PK in B; drav BHI parallel to GE, cutting GK' in H: Join HD and PK. It is evident that CGGis bisected in F, and that XB æ 2 FD: also KH: HG æ KB: BE,  CD: DG. Therefore DH is parallel to CK, or to PG. But because PF æ F K, ID is  DB, and IH / HB. Thereſore ?D  HB, and Vou. III. 2I and is there- FD  KB, =æ2 FD; and FD is bisected in F. Therefore OD  &&TED That is, in order that the eye-glass RD may correct the dispersion of the field-glass PC, the distance beteen them must be equal to the half sum of their sfocal distunces very nearly. More exactly, the distaunce between them must be equal to the half sum of the focal distance of the eye-glass, and the distance at which the field-glass would form an image of the object-glasss For the point G is the focus to vhich a ray coming from the centre of the object-glass is reſracted by the field-glass. This is a very simple solution of this important problem. Huyghenss eye- piece corresponds with it exactly. If indeed the dispersion at P is not entirely produced by the refraction, but perhaps combined with some previous dispersion, the point M Fig. 21.) vill not coincide with C, Fig. 22.), and ve shall have GC to GM, as the natural dispersion at P to the dispersion which really obtains there. This may destroy the equation cõr/D Thus, in a manner rather unexpected, have ve freed the eye-glasses from the greatest part oſ the effect of dispersion. We may do it entirely by pushing the eye-glass a little nearer to the field-glass. This will render the violet rays a little divergent from the red, so as to produce a perfect picture at the bottom of the eye. But by doing so we have hurt the distinctness oſ the whole picture, because F is not in the focus of RD. We remedy this by drawing both glasses out a little, and the telescope is made perfect. This improvement cannot be applied to the construction oſ quadrant telescopes, such as Fig. 200. Mr Ramsden has attempted it, however, in a very ingenious way, which merits a place here, and is also instructive in another way. The field-glass HD (Fig. 20.) is a plano-convex, vith ita Plane side next the image GF. It is placed very near this image. The consequence of this disposition is, that the image GF produces a vertical image g f, which is much less convex towards the glass He then places a lens on the point C, where the red ray would cross the axiss. The violet ray vill pass on the other side of it. Iſ the focal distance of this glass be c, the vision will be distinct and free from colour. It has, however, the inconveniency of obliging the eye to be close to the glass, which is very troublesOme. This would be a good construction for a magic-lantern, or for the object-glass oſf a solar microscope, or indeed of any compound microscope. We may presume that the rẽader is now pretty familiar with the different circumstances which must be considered in the construction of an eye-piece, and proceed to consider those which must be employed to erect the object. This may be done by placing the lens which receives the light from the object-glass in such a manner, that a second image (inverted with respect to the first) may be formed beyond it, and this may be vieved by an eye-glasss. Such a construction is represented in Fig. 28. But, besides many other defects, ĩt tinges the object prodigiously with colour. The ray o d is dispersed at d into the red ray d r, and the violet d v, v being farther from the centre than r, the refracted ray o v erosses 7 ? both by reason oſ spherical aberration, and its greater refrangibility. But the common day telescope, invented by F. Rheita, has, in this respect, greatly the advantage of the one now describedc. The rays of compound light are dispersed. The violet ray ſalls without the red ray, but is accurately collected with it at the focus as ve shall demonstrate by and by. Since they cross each other, the violet ray must fall within the red ray, and be less refracted than if it had fallen on the same point with the red ray Had it fallen there it would have separated from it; but by a proper diminution of its reſraction, it is kept parallel to it, or nearly so. And this is one excllence of this telescope; when constructed with three eye-glasses perſectly equal, the colour is sensibly diminished, and by using an eye-glass somevhat smaller, it may be removed entirelyWe say no more of it at present, because we shall find its construction included in another, which is still more perfect. It is evident at first sight that this telescope may be improved, by substituting for the eye-glass, the Huyghenian double eye-glass, or field-glass and eye-glass represented in Fig. 19. and Fig. 20; and that the first of these may be improved and rendered achromatic. This will require the two glasses è ſ and h to be increased from their present dimensions to the size of a field-glass, suited to the magniſying power of the telescope, supposing it an astronomical telescope. Thus we shall have a telescope of four eye-glasses. The three first will be of a considerable focal distance, and two oſ them will have a common focus at h. But this is considerably different from the eye-piece of four glasses which are now used, and are ſar better. We are indebted for them to Mr Dollond, vho was a mathematician as vell as an artist, and in the course of his research discovered resources which had not been thought of. He had not then discovered the achromatic object- glass, and vas busy in improving the eye-glasses by diminishing their spherical aberration. His first thought was to make the Huyghenian addition at both the images of the day telescope. This suggested to him the following eye- piece of five glasses. Fig. 24. represents this eye-piece, but there is not room ſor the object-glass at its proper distance. A pencil of rays coming from the upper point oſ the objecet is made to converge (by the object-glass) to G, where it would form a picture of that part of the ohjeet. But it is intercepted by the lens A a, and its axis is bent towards the axis of the telescope in the direction a 5.. At the same time, the rays which converged to G converge to g, and there is formed an inverted picture of the object at ſ. The axis oſ the pencil is again refracted at b, crosses the axis of the telescope in H, is reſracted again at c, at d, and at e, and at last crosses the axis in I. The rays of this pencil, diverging from g, are made less diverging, and proceed as if they came from g, in the line Bg The lens c C causes them to converge to g', in the line G C g. The lens d D makes them converge still more to G', and there they form an erect picture G F⸗; diverging from G', they are rendered parallel by the refraction at e. At H the rays are nearly paralle Had the glass B à been a little farther ſfrom A, they would have been accurately sc, and the object-glass, with the glasses A and B, would have formed an astronomical telescope ith the Huyghenian eye-piece. The glasses C, D, and E, are intended merely for bending the rays back again till they again cross the axis in I. The glass C tends chiefly to diminish the great angle BHb; and then the two glasses D and E are another Huyghenian eye-piece. The art in this construction lies in the proper adjustment oſ the glasses, so as to divide the whole bending of the pencil pretty equally among them, and to form the last image in the focus of the eye-glass, and at a proper distance ſrom the other glass. Bringing B nearer to A would bend the pencil more to the axiss. Placing C farther from B would do the same thing; but this would be accompanied with more aberration, because the rays would fall at a greater distance from the centres of the lensess The greatest bending is made at the field-glass D; and ve imagine that the telescope would be improved, and made more distinet at the edges of the field, by employing another glass of great focal distance between C and D. There is an image formed at H of the object-glasses, and the whole light passes through a small circle in this place It is usual to put a plate here pierced with a hole which has the diameter oſ this imagee. A second image of the objectglass is formed at I, and indeed wherever the pencils eross the axiss A lens placed at H males no change in any of the angles, nor in the magnifying power, and affects only the place where the images are ſormed. And, on the other hand, a lens placed at f, or F, where a real image is form ed, makes no change in the places of the images, but aſſects the mutual inclination of the pencils. This aſfords a rsource to the artist, by which he may combine properties which seem incompatible. The aperture of A determines the visible field and all the other apertures. We must avoid ſorming a real image, such as ſę, or F G, on or very near any glass. For we cannot see this Image without seeing along with it every particle of dust and every scratch on the glass We see them as making part of the object when the image is exactly on the glass, and ve see them conſusedly, and so as to confuse the object, when the image is near it. For when the image is on or very near any glass, the pencil of light occupies a very small part of its surface, and a particle of dust intercepts a great proportion of it. It is plain that this construetion will not do for the telescope of graduated instruments, because the micrometer cannot be applied to the second image ſg, on account of iis being a little distorted, as has been observed of the Huyghenian eye-piece. Also the interposition of the glass C makes it diſficult io correct the dispersion. By proper reasoning from the correction in the Huyghenian eye-piece, we are led to the best construetion of one vith three glasses, which we shall now consider, taking it in a particular form, which shall make the discussion easy, and make us fully masters oſ the principles which lead toa better ſform Therefore let PA (Fig. 25.) be the glass which first receives the light proceeding from the image formed by the object-glass, and let OP be the axis of the extreme pencil. This is refracted into PR, which is again reſracted into R 7 by the next lens B7. Let b be the focus of parallel rays of the second lens. Drav PB7. We know that Ab: bB =PB: Br, and that rays of one kind diverging from P vill be collected at . But if PR, PV be a red and a violet ray, the violet ray ill be more reſracted at V, and vill cross the red ray in some intermediate point g of the line R . If thereſore the ſirst image had been formed precisely on the lens PA, we should have à second image at 7g ſree from all coloured fringes. Iſ the reſractions at P and R are equal (as in the common day telescope), the dispersion at V must be equal to that at P, or the angle vVr  VPR. But we have ultimately RPV: R7VBC: AB, ( Bb: Ab by the focal theorem). Thereſore g Vr: grV (orgr: gV, orCſ: ſB) =Bb: Ab, and AB: AbmR7: Rg This shows by the way the advantage of the common day telescope. In this AB=2 A b, and therefore f is the place oſ the last image which is free from coloured fringes. But this image vill not be seen free from coloured ſringes through the eye-glass Cr, if7 be its focus: For had gr,  v been both red rays, they would have been parallel aſter refraction; but v being a violet ray, will be more refracted. It vill not indeed be so0 much deflected from parallelism as the violet ray, which naturally accompanies the red ray to r, because it ſalls nearer the centree. By computation its dispersion is diminished about ;th. In order that 2 7 may be made parallel to g7 after refraction, the refraction at 7 must be such that the dispersion corresponding to it may be of a proper magnitude. How to determine this is the question. Let the dispersion at g be to the dispersion produced by the refraction at r (uhich is required for producing the intended magniſying l Let the glasses A and B;be placed so that the posterior focus of the first nearly coincides with the anterior focus of the second, or rather so that the anterior focus of B may be at the place where the image of the object-glass is formed, by which situation the apertũre necessary for transmitting the whole light will be the smallest possible. Place the third C at a distance ſrom the second, which exceeds the sum of their focal distances by a space which is a third proportional to the distance of the first and second, and the focal distance of the second. The distance of the first eyeglass from the object-glass must be equal to the produet of the focal distance of the first and second divided by their sUM. Let O o, A a, Bb, Cc, the focal distances oſ the glasses, be O, a, b,  Then make AB / a +b nearly; v be BC b+c + 5: OAæ 7c or magnifying power will be 2 ; the equivalent The amplification a b Aperture of A foc. dist. ob. gleye-glass/ s:. and the field of vision  3S435 x These eye-pieces will admit the use of a mierometer at the place of the first image, because it has no distortion. Mr Dollond was anxious to comhine this achromatism in the eye-pieces with the advantages which he had found in the eye-pieces with five glassess This eye-piece oſ three glasses necessarily has a very great refraction at the glass B, where the pencil which has come from the other side of the axis must be rendered again convergent, or at least parallel to itt. This occasions considerable aberrations. This may be avoided by giving part of this refraction to a glass put between the first and second, in the same way as he has done by the glass B put between A and C in his fiveglass eye-piecee But this deranges the whole process. His ingenuity, however, surmounted this diſficulty, and he made eye- pieces of four glasses, which seem as perfect as can be desiredl. He has not published his ingenious investigation; and ve observe the London artists worl: very much at random, probably copying the proportions of some of his best glasses, without understanding the principle, and therefore frequently mistakingg. We see many eye-pieces which are far ſrom being achromatic. We imagine, therefore, that it vill be an acceptable thing to the artists to have precise instructions how to proceed, nothing of this kind having appeared in our language, and the investigations of Euler, D Alembert, and even Boscovich, being so abstruse as to be inaccessible to all but experienced analystss. We hope to render it extremely simple. It is evident, that if we make the rays of different colours unite on the surſace of the last eye-glass but one, commonly called the field-glass, the thing will be done, because the dispersion ſrom this point of union will then unite with the dispersion produced by this glass alone; and this increased dispersion may be corrected by the last eye-glass in the way already shown. Therefore let A, B (Fig. 26.) be the stations which we have fixed on ſor the first and second eye-glasses, in order to give a proper portion of the whole reſraction to the second glass. Let b be the anterior focus of B. Drav PBthrough the centre of B. Make Ab:  B/AB: BK. Drav the perpendicular r, meeting the refracted ray in r. We know by the ſocal theorem, that red rays diverging from P will converge to 7; but the violet ray PV, being more reſracted, will cross R 7 in some point Z. Draving the perpendicular ſę, ve get f for the proper place of the field-glass. Let the refracted ray R r, produced backwards, meet the ray OP coming from the centre of the object-glass in O. Let the angle of dispersion RPV be called ꝑ, and the angle of dispersion at V, that is, r V5, be v, and the angle Vr R be r. It is evident that OR: OP =pꝑ: 9, because the dispersions are proportional to the sines of the refractions, whieh, in this case, are very nearly as the reſractions themselves. Let y or 75 or be made = m. Then v Ab mp; also p: r=DBK: AB, =bB: Ab, and rp. B5 or, making ænrnp: therefore v: r m: n, PB Ad B B The angle R 2V æ gVr +g7V æpQ . m +n; and RGV: Rr rmRr: Rq,orm +n: n=DRr: Rg, and pB: Al. n .. Ręgo.  R- mn But Rr is ultimately= BK  AB B AB AB n AB ] n Therefore R 3/ ũ x mVnnmn AB and B / mn This val f B is evidently  b B AB is value o ſ is evidently x 7B Now b B being a constant quantity while the glass B is the . AB same, the place of union varies with 7B 6 If we remove B a little farther from A, we increase AB, and ꝓ B, and A b, each by the same quantity. This evidently diminishes B On the other hand, bringing B nearer to A increases B. If we keep the distance between the glasses the same, but increase the focal distance b B, we augment B, because this change augments the numerator and dibBXAB PB+AV In this manner we can unite the colours at what distance we please, and consequently can unite them in the place of the intended field-glass, from which they will diverge with an increased dispersion, viz. with the dispersion competent minishes the denominator oſ the fraction to the reſraction produced there, and the dispersion ꝑ x m+ n conjoined. It only remains to determine the proper focal distances of the field-glass and eye-glass, and the place of the eyeglass, so that this dispersion may be finally corrected. This is an indeterminate problem, admitting of an infinity of solutionss. We shall limit it by an equal division of the two remaining refractions, which are necessary in order to produce the intended magniſying power. This construction has the advantage of diminishing the aberration. Thus we know the two refractions, and the dispersion competent to each; it being nearly 55th of the refraction. Call this 5. The whole dispersion at the field-glass consists of q;, and of the angle Kę V of Fig. 26, which ve also know to be =ꝓ x m + n. Call their sum s. Let Fig. 2. represent this addition to the eye-piece. C” is the field-glass coming in the place ofſę oſ Fig. 26. and R gw is the red ray coming from the glass BR. Drav gs parallel to the intended emergent pencil from the eye glass; that is, making the angle Cs g vith the axis correspond to the intended magniſying pover. Bisect this angle by the line  K Make s 2: 8 5: ꝗ and drav ꝗ K, cutting C”g in . Draw 13 D, cuttinggè in 3, and the axis in D. Drav à d and Dr perpendicular to the axis. Then a lens placed in D, having the ſocal distance D d, will destroy the dispersion at the lens 4, which reſracts the ray g o into gr. Let g 0 be the violet ray, making the angle v gr n3. It is plain, by the common optical theorem, that g will be refracted into r7 parallel to ? D. Drav g D7 meeting r7, and join v?7. By the focal theorem two red rays gr, g v, vill be united in ? But the violet ray ill be more refracted, and will take the path v ?, making the angle of dispersion ? v q; very nearly, because the dispersion at  does not sensibly diſſer ſrom that at . Nov, in the small angles of reſraction which obtain in optical instruments, the angles ? ? v, r g v are very nearly as gr and r?, or as g D and DV, or as CD and DT; which, by the focal theorem, are as Cd and d D; that is, Dd: d c rgv: rrv. But Dà: dCæ D): dt, ms8: 89.,7 s: ;. But rgv=/3; therefore r  v/q, r vv, and v V is purallel to r7, and the whole dispersion at g is corrected by the lens D?r. The focal distance C c of C4~ is had by draving C æ parallel to  ę, meeting R ę in æ, and drawing æ c perpendicular to the axis. It is easy to see that this (not inelegant) construction is not limited to the equality of the refractions węr, Kr7. In whatever proportion the whole refraction w g s is divided, ve alvays can tell the proportion of the dispersions which the two reſractions occasion at  and r, and can therefore find the values oſ 5 and 2. Indeed this solution includes the problem in p. 504; but it had not occurred to us till the present oceasion. Our readers will not be displeased with this variety of resource. The intelligent reader will see, that in this solution some quantities and ratios are assumed as equal vhich are not strictly so, in the same manner as in all the elementary optical theorems. The parallelism, however, oſ u v and r r may be made accurate, by pushing the lens D 7 nearer to Cg, or retiring it ſrom itt. We may also, by pushing it still nearer, induce a small divergency of the violet ray, so as to produce accurate vision in the eye, and may thus make the vision through a telescope more perſect than with the naked eye, vhere dispersion is by no means avoided. It would therefore be an improvement to have the eye-glass in a sliding tube for adjustment. Bring the telescope to distinet vision; and if any colour be visible about the edges of the field, shiſt the eye-glass till this colour is removed. The vision may now become indistinet: but this is correeted by shiſting the place of the whole eye-piece. We have examined trigonometrically the progress of a red and a violet ray through many eye-pieces oſf Dollonds and Ramsdens best telescopes; and ve have found in all oſ them that the colours are united on or very near the field-glass; so that ve presume that a theory omewhat analogous to ours has directed the ingenious inventors. We meet with many made by other artists, and even some of theirs, here a considerable degree of colour remains, sometimes in the natural order, and oſten in the contrary order. This must happen in the hands of mere imitators, ignorant of principlee We presume that ve have now made this principle sufficiently plain. Fig. 2. represents the eye-piece oſ a very fine spyglass by Mr Ramsden; the ſocal length of its objectglass is 8 inches, with 15th of aperture, 2° 05 of visible field, and 15,4 magnifying power. The distances and ſocal lengths are of their proper dimensions, but the apertures are à larger, that the progress of a lateral pencil might be more distinctly dravn. The dimensions are as ſollow: Foe. lengths Aa=0,0775 Bb=l,0205 C1,01 Ddæ0, 79 Distances AB=I, I8 BCæI, 83 CD=I, 105. It is perſectly achromatic, and the colours are united, not precisely, at the lens C4, but about ęth of an inch nearer the eye-glass. It is obvious that this combination of glasses may be used as a microscope; for if, instead of the image formed by the object- glass at FG, we substitute a small object, iluminated from behind, as in compound microscopes; and iſ we draw the eye-piece a very small way from this object, the pencils of parallel rays emergent ſrom the eye-glass D will become convergent to very distant points, and will there form an inverted and enlarged picture oſ the object, which may be viewed by a Huyghenian eye-piece; and we may thus get high magniſying powers without using very deep glasses. We tried the eye-piece of which we have given the dimensions in this way, and found that it might be made to magnify 180 times with very great dis- tinctness When used as the magnifier oſ a solar mierosCOpe, it infinitely surpasses every thing we have ever seen. The picture formed by a solar microscope is generally so indistinet, that it is fit only for amusing ladies; but with this magnifier it seemed perfeetly sharp. We thereſore recommend this to the artists as a valuable article of their trade. The only thing which remains to be considered in the theory of reſracting telescopes is the forms of the different lenses. Hitherto we have had no oceasion to consider any thing but their focal distances; but their aberrations depend greatly on the adjustments of their forms to their situationss. When the conjugate focuses of a lens are determined by the service which it is to perform, there is a certain ſorm or proportion between the curvatures of their anterior and posterior surſaces, which will make their aberrations the smallest possible. It is evident that this proportion is to be obtained by making the fluxion oſ the quantity within the parenthesis in the formula of page 442, line 12, equal to nothing. When this is done, e obtain this formula for a, the radius of curvature for the anterior surface oſ a lens. x 2 .. m where m is the ratio of the sine of incidence to the sine of refraction, and 7 is the distance of the focus of incident rays, positive or negative, according as they converge or diverge, all measured on a scale of which the unit is n,half of the radius of the equivalent isosceles lens. It will be suſficiently exact for our purpose to sUppOse n though it is more nearly s1 In this case a 5 10 4g5+m m a æ B, =—Sr+ ſ . = r 7 ? E Therefore a 2 r70. A  1,I— v b a a As an example, let it be required to give the radii of curvature in inches for, the eye-glass b æ of page 488, which we shall suppose of I4 inches focal distance, and that ec (r) is 83th inches. The radius of curvature for the equivalent isosceles lens is 1,5, and its half is 0,75. Thereſore r/ =35; d~”x5244 and our formula is a ẽ x3 F70 ; 0 ES 0,575: l l1—a 0, 125 0,875 and aa  0©5 and b / 9 T. These values are parts of a scale, of which the unit is 0,75 inchess. Therefore a, in inches,O, 875 x 0,75,  0, 65525 b, in inches, /T x 0,5, =5,25. And here we must observe that the posterior surface is concave: for b is a positive quantity, because I a is a positive quantity as vell as a; thereſore the centre of sphericity of both surfaces lies beyond the lens. And this determination is not very different from the usual practice, hich commonly makes this lens a plane convex vith its flat side next the eye: and there vill not be much difference in the perſormance of these two lenses; for in all cases of maxima and minima, even a pretty considerable change of the best dimensions does not make a sensible change in the result. The same consideration leads to a rule which is very simple and suſficiently exact for ordinary situationss. This is to make the curvatures such, that the incident and emergent pencils may be nearly equally inclined to the surſaces of the lenss. Thus in the eye-piece with five glasses, A and B should be most convex on their anterior sides; C should be most convex on the posterior side; D should he nearly isosceles; and E nearly plano-convex. But this is not so easy a matter as appears at ſirst sight The lenses oſ an eye-piece have not only to bend the seve- ral pencils of light to and from the axis of the telescope; they have also to form images on the axis oſ these pencils. These offices frequently require opposite forms. Thus the glass A of Fig. 25. should be most convex on the side next the object, that it may produce little distortion of the pencilss. But it should be most convex next the eye, that it may produce distinct vision of the image FG, which is very near it. This image should have its concavity turned tovards A, whereas it is towards the object-glass We must therefore endeavour to make the vertical image fę™ ſlatter, or even convex. This requires a glass very flat beſore, and convex behind. For similar reasons the object-glass of a microseope and the simple eye-glass of an astronomical telescope should be formed the same way. This is a subject of most difficult discussion, and requires a theory which few of our readers would relish; nor does our limits afford room ſor it. The artists are obliged to grope their vay The proper method of experiment would be, to make eye-piecesof large dimensions, with extravagant apertures to increase the aberrations, and to provide for each station A, B, C, and D, a number oſ lenses of the same ſocal distance, but of different forms: and we would advise making the trial in the way oſ a solar mieroscope, and to have two eye-pieces on trial at oncee Their pietures ean be formed on the same sereen, and accurately compared; whereas it is diſficult tc keep in remembrance the perſormance of one eye-piece, and compare it with another. We have nov treated the theory of refracting telescopes vith considerable minuteness, and have perhaps exceeded the ſimits which some readers may think reasonable But we have long regretted that there is not any theory on this subject from which a eurious person ean learn the improvements which have been made since the time of Dr Smith, or an artist learm how to proceed with intelligence in his Vou. III. 22K profession. IF we have accomplished either of these ends, we trust that the public will receive our labours vith satisfaction. We cannot add any thing to what Dr Smith has delivered on the theory of refſlecting telescopes. There appears to be the same possibility of correeting thie aberration oſ the great speculum by the contrary aberration of a convex small speculum, that we have practised in the compound objectglass of an achromatic reſracting telescope. But this cannot be, unless we make the radius of the convex speculum exceedingly large, which destroys the magniſying power and the brightnesss This therefore must be given up. Indeed their performance, when well executed, does already surpass all imagination. Dr Herschel has ſfound great advantages in what he calls the ſront view, not using a plane mirror to throw the pencils to one sidee But this cannot be practised in any but telescopes so large, that the loss oſ light, occassioned by the interposition of the observer's head, may be disregarded NoTHING remains but to deseribe the mechanism of some oſ the most convenient forms. To deseribe all the varieties of shape and accommodation which may be given to a telescope, would be a task as Atrifling as prolix. The artists of London and of Paris have racked their inventions to please every fancy, and to suit every purpos. We shall content ourselves with a few general maxims, deduced from the scientific consideration oſ a telescope, as an instrument by which the visual angle subtended by a distinct object is greatly magnified. The chieſ consideration is to have a steady view of the distant objeet. This is unattainable, unless the axis of the instrument be kept constantly directed to the same point of it: for when the telescope is gently shiſted from its position, the object seems to move in the same or in the opposite direction, according as the telescope inverts the objet æ shows it ereett. This is owing to the magniſying power, because the apparent angular motion is greater than what we naturally connect with the motion oſf the telescope. This does not happen when we look through a tube vithout glasses. All shaking of the instrument thereſore makes the object dance before the eye; and this is disagreeable, and hinders us from seeing it distinetly. But a tremulous motion, however small, is infinitely more prejudicial to the performance of a telescope, by making the object quiver before us A person walking in the room prevents us from seeing distinetly; nay, the very pulsation in the body oſ the observer agitates the floor enough to produce this effect, when the telescope has a great magniſying power: For the visible motion of the object is then an imperceptible tremor, like that oſf an harpsichord wire, which produces an effect precisely similar to optical indistinctness; and every point of the object is diffused over the whole space of the angular tremor, and appears coexistent in every part of this space, just as a harpsichord wire does while it is sounding The more rapid this motion is, the indistinctness is the more complete. Therefore the more firm and elastic and well bound together the frame-work and apertures of our telescope is, the more hurtful vill this consequence bee A mounting of lead, were it practicable, ould be preferable to wood, iron, or brasss. This is one great cause of the indistinctness of the very finest reflecting telescopes of the usual construetions, and can never he totally removed. In the Gregorian form, it is hardly possible to damp the elastic tremor of the small speculum, carried by an arm supported at one end only, even though the tube were motionless. We were vitnesses of a great improvement made on a ſour-feet reflecting telescope, by supporting the small speculum hy a strong plate of lead placed across the tube, and led by an adjusting serew at each end. But even the great mirror may vibrate enough to produce indistinctness. Refracting telescopes are free from this inconvenięney, because a small angular motion of the object-glass round one of ĩs own diameters has no sensible effect on the image in iĩts ſocus. They are affected only by an angular motion of the axis oſ the telescope or of the eye-glasses. This single consideration gives us great help towards judging oi the merits oſf any particular apparatus We should study it in this particular, and see whether its form makes the tube readily susceptible of sueh tremulous motions. Ifit does, the firmer it is, and the more elastic it is, the worse. All forms thereſore where the tube is supported only near the middle, or here the whole immediately or remotely depend on one narrov joint, are defective. Reasoning in this vay, ve say with confidence, that of all the forms of a telescope apparatus, the old- ſashioned simple stand represented in Fig. 29. is by far the best, and that others are superior according as the disposition of the points of support of the tube approaches to thiss Let the pivots A, B, be fixed in the lintel and sole of a window. Let the four braces terminate very near to these pivots. Let the telescope lie on the pin F, resting on the shoulder round the eye-piece, while the ſar end oſ it rests on one oſ the pins 1, 2, 3, &e.; and let the distance of these pins from F very little exceed the length of the telescope. The trembling of the axis, even vhen considerable, cannot aſfect the position of the tube, because the braces terminate almost at the pivotss The tremor of the brace CD does as little harm, because it is nearly perpendicular to the tubee. And if the object-glass were close at the upper supporting pin, and the focus at the lower pin F, even the bending and trembling of the tube will have no effect on its optical axiss The instrument is only subjeet to horizontal tremors. These may be almost annihilated by having a slender rod coming ſfrom a hook's joint in the side of the window, and passing through such another joint close by the pin . We have seen an instrument of this form, having AB parallel to the earth's axiss The whole ap- paratus did not cost 50 shillings, and we ſind it not in the least sensible manner affected by a storm of wind. It was by observations with this instrument that the tables of the motions of the Georgium Sidus, published in the Edinburgh Transactions, were constructed, and they are as accurate as any that have yet appeared. This is an excellent equatorial: But this apparatus is not portable, and it is sadly deficient in elegance. The ſollowing is the best method we have seen oſ combining these circumstances with the indispens able requisities oſ a good telescope. The pillar VX (Fig. 80.) rises from a firm stand, and has a horizontal motion round a cone which completely fills it. This motion is regulated by a rack-work in the box at V. The screw of this rack-work is turned by means oſ the handle P, of a convenient length, and the screw may be disengaged by the click or detent V, vhen we would turn the instrument a great vay at oncee The telescope has a vertical motion round the jolnt Q placed near the middle oſ the tube. The lower end of the tube is supported by the stay OT. This consists of a tube RT, fastened to the pillar by a joint T, which allows the stay to move in a vertical planee. Within this tube slides another, with a stifſ motion. This tube is connected with the telescope by another joint O, also admitting motion n a vertical plane. The side M of this inner tube is formed into a rack, in which works a pinion fixed to the top of the tube RT, and turned by the ſlat fingerpieco R. The reader vill readily see the advantages and the remaining defects of this apparatus. It is very portable, because the telescope is easily disengaged from it, and the legs and stay fold up. If the joint Q were immediately under A, it would be much ſreer from all tremor in the vertical plane. But nothing can hinder other tremors arising from the long pillar and the three springy legss These communicate all external agitations with great vigour. The instrument should be set on a stone pedestal, or, what ĩs better, a ca filled with wet sand. This pedestal, which necessity perhaps suggested to our scientific navigators, is the best that can be imagined. Fig. 81. is the stand usually given to reflecting telescopes. The vertical tube FBG is fastened to the tube by finger-screws, which pass through the slits at F and G. This arch turns round a joint in the head of the divided pillar, and has its edge cut into an oblique rack, which is acted on by the horizontal screw, furnished with the finger-piece A This screw turns in a horizontal square frame. This frame turns round à horizontal joint in the oſf side, vhich cannot be seen in this view. In the side of this frame next the eye there is a finger-screw a, which passes through the frame, and presses on the round horizontal plate D. By screwing down this finger-screw, the frame is brought up, and presses the horizontal screw to the rack. Thus the elevation of the telescope is fixed, and may be nicely changed by the finger applied to A and turning this screw. The horizontal round plate D moves stiſſly round on another plate of nearly equal diameter. This under plate has a deep conical hollow socket, which is nicely fitted by grinding to a solid cone formed on the top of the great upright pillar, and they may be firmly fixed in any position by the finger-screv EE To the under plate is fastened a box c, containing a horizontal serew C, which always works in a rack cut in the edge oſ the upper plate, and cannot be disengaged ſrom it. When a great vertical or horizontal motion is wanted, the serews a and E are slacked, and by tightening them the telescope may be fixed in any position, and then any small movements may he given it by the finger plates A and C. This stand is very subject to brisk tremor, either from external agitation of the pedestal, or from the immediate action oſ the wind; and ve have seldom seen distinctly through telescopes mounted in this manner, till one end of the tube was pressed against something that was very steady and unelasticc. It is quite astonishing what a change this produces. We took a very fine telescope made by James Short, and laid the tube on a great lump of soſt clay, pressing it firmly down into it. Several persons, ignorant oſ our purpose, looked through it, and read a iable of logarithms at the distance of 10 yardss. We then put the telescope on its stand, and pointed it to the same object; none of the company could read at a greater distance than 235 yards, although they could perceive no tremor. They thought the vision as sharp as beſore; but the incontrovertible proof of the contrary was, that they could not read at such a distance. If the round plates were of much greater dimensions; and if the lower one, instead of being fixed to the pillar, were supported on four stout pillars standing on another plate; and if the vertical arch had a horizontal axis turning on two upright frames firmly fixed to the upper plate the instrument would he much freer ſrom tremor. Such stands were made formerly; but being much more bulky and inconvenient for package, they have gone into disuse. The high magniſying powers of Dr Herschel's telescopes made all the usual apparatus for their support extremely imperſect. But his judgment, and his ingenuity and ſertility in resource, are as eminent as his philosophical ardour. He has contrived for his reſlecting telescopes stands which have every property that can hbe desired The tubes are all supported at the two endss. The motions, both vertical and horizontal, are contrived vith the utmost simplicity and firmnesss. We canmot more properly conclude this article, than with a description of his 40-ſeet telescope, the noblest monument of philosophical zeal and of princely munificence that the world can boast oſ. Fig. 32. represents a view of this instrument in a meridional situation, as it appears vhen seen from a convenient distance by a person placed  the south-west of it. The foundation in the ground consists of two concentrie circular brick walls, the outermost of which is 2 feet in diameter, and the inside one 2l feet. They are two feet six inches deep under ground; two feet three inches broad at the bottom, and one foot two inches at the top; and are capped with paving stones about three inches thick, and twelve and three quarters broadc. The bottom frame oſ the whole apparatus rests upon these two walls by twenty concentric rollers I, I, I, und is moveable upon a pivot, which gives a horizontal motion to the whole apparatus, a well as to the telescope. The tube of the telescope A, though very simple in its form, which is cylindrical, was attended with great diſiculties in the constructionn. This is not to be wondered at, vhen its size, and the materials of which ĩit is made, are considered. Its length is 39 feet four inches; it measures four feet ten inches in diameter; and every part of it is of ironn. Upon a moderate computation, the weight oſ a wooden tube must have exceeded an ĩron one at least 3000 pounds; and its durahility would have been far inferior o that of ironn It is made of rolled or sheet iron, which has been joined together without rivets, by a kind of seaming well known to those vho make iron-funnels for stoves. Very great mechanical sill is used in the contrivance oſ the apparatus by which the telescope is supported and directed. In order to command every altitude, the point of support is moveable; and its motion is effected by mechanism, s0 that the telescope may be moved from its most backward point of support to the most forward, and, by means of the pulleys GG suspended from the great beam H, be set to any altitude, up to the very zenith. The tube is also made to rest with the point of support in a ꝑivot, which permits it to be turned sidevise. The concave ſace of the great mirror is 48 inches of poahed surface in diamete. The thickness, which is equal ry part of it, remains now about three inches and æ half; and its weight, when it came from the cast, was 2118 pounds, of which it must have lost a small quantity in polishing. To put this speculum into the tube, it is suspended vertically by a erane in the laboratory, and placed on a small narrow carriage, which is drawn out, rolling upon planks, iill it comes near the back of the tube; here it is again suspended and placed in the tube by a peculiar apparatus. The method of observing by this telescope is by what Dr Herschel calls the ſront view; the observer being placed in a seat C, suspended at the end of it, with his back tovards the object he views. There is no small speculum, but the magniſfiers are applied immediately to the first ſocal image. From the opening oſ the telescope, near the place of the eye-glass, a speaking pipe runs down to the bottom of the tube, where it goes into a turning joint; and aſter several other inflections, it at length divides into two branches, one going into the observatory D, and the other into the workroom E. By means of the speaking pipe the communications of the observer are conveyed to the assistant in the observatory, and the workman is directed to perform the required motions. In the observatory is placed a valuable sidereal timepiece, made by Mr Shelton. Close to it, and of the same height, is a polar distance-piece, which has a dial-plate of the same dimensions with the time-piece: this piece may be made to show polar distance, Zenith distance, declination or altitude, by setting it differently The time and polar distance pieces are placed s0 that the assistant sits before them at a table, with the speaking-pipe rising between them; and in this manner observations may be ritten down very conveniently. This noble instrument, with proper eye-glasses, magnifies above 6G000 times, and is the largest that has ever been made. Such oſ our readers as wish for a fuller ac- count oſ the machinery attached to it, viz. the stairs, ladders, and platform B, may have recoursæe to the second part of the Transactions of the Royal Society ſor 1795; in vhich, by means of 18 plates and 68 pages of letter-press, an ample detail is given oſ every circumstance relatng to joiner's work, carpenter's work, and smith's work, which attended the formation and erection of this telescope. It was completed on August the 28th, 1789, and on the same day was the sixth satellite of Saturn discovered. PNEUMATICS. I. Tnis term is restricted, in the present habits of our language, to that part of natural philosophy which treats of the mechanical properties oſ elastic fluidss The vord, in its original meaning, expresses a quality of air, or, more properly, of breath. 2. We have extended (on the authority of present custom) the term PNEUMATICS to the study of the mechanical properties oſ all elastic or sensibly compressible fluids, that is, oſ ſluids whose elasticity and compressibility become an interesting object of our attention; as the term HYDROsTaTICS is applied to the study of the mechanical properties of such bodies as interest us by their ſluidity or liquidity only, or whose elasticity and compressibility are not familiar or interesting, though not less real or general than in the case oſ air and all vapours. 3. OF all the sensibly compressible fluids air is the most familiar, was the first studied, and the most minutely examined. It has therefore been generally taken as the example of their mechanical properties, while those mechanical properties which are peculiar to any of them, and therefore characteristic, have usually been treated as an appendix to the general science of pneumatics. No objection oc- curs to us against this method, which will therefore b adopted in treating this article. 4. But although the mechanical properties are the porper subjects of our consideration, it will be impossible to avoid considering occasionally properties which are more of a chemical nature;. because they occasion such modifications of the mechanical properties as would ſrequently be unintelligible without considering them in conjunction vith the other; and, on the other hand, the mechanical properties produce such modifications oſ the properties merely chemical, and of very interesting phenomena consequent on them, that these would often pass unexplained unless we give an account of them in this place. 5. By mechanical properties ve would be understood to mean such as produce, or are connected with, sensible changes oſ motion, and vhich indicate the presence and agency of moving or mechanical powerss. They are therefore the subject of mathematical discussion; admitting of measure, number, and direction, notions purely mathematical. We shall thereſore begin with the consideration of air. 6. It is by no means an idle question,  Wiat is this air of which s0 much is said and written?? We see nothing, we feel nothingg We find ourselves at liberty to move about in any direction without any let or hinderance Whence, then, the assertion, that we are surrounded vith a matter called air? A few very simple observations and experiments will show us that this assertion is well-founded. T. We are accustomed to say, that a vessel is empty when we have poured out of it the water which it contained. Take a cylindrical glass jar (Plate IX. Fig. l.), having a small hole in its bottom; and having stopped this hole, fill the jor vith water, and then pour out the vater, leaving the glas empty, in the common acceptation of the word. Nov, throW a bit of cork, or any light body, on the surface of water in a cistern: cover this with the glass jar held in the hand vith its bottom upwards, and move it downwards, keeping it all the while in an upright position. The eork vill continue to float on the surface of the water in the inside of the glass, and will most distinetly show whereabouts that surſace is. It will thus be seen, that the water within the glass has its surface considerably lower than that of the surrounding water; and however deep ve immerge the glass, we shall find that the water will never rise in the inside of it so as to fill itt. If plunged to the depth of 2 feet, the water will only half fill it; and yet the acknowledged laws of hydrostatics tell us, that the water would fill the glass if there were nothing to hinder it. There is therefore something already vithin the glass which prevents the water from getting into it; manifesting in this manner the most distinctive property of matter, viz. the hindering other matter from occupying the same place at the same time. 8. While things are in this condition, pull the stopper out of the hole in the bottom of the jar, and the water will instantly rise in the inside of the jar, and stand at an equal height within and without. This is justly ascribed to the escape through the hole of the matter which formerly obstructed the entry of the water: for if the hand be held before the hole, a puſf will be distinetly felt, or a feather held there will be blown aside; indicating in this manner, that what prevented the entry of the water, and now es capes, possesses another characteristie property of matter, impulsive forc. The materiality is coneluded from this appearance in the same manner that the materiality oſ water is concluded from the impulse of a jet from a pipe. We also see the mobility of the formerly pent up, and now liberated, substance, in consequence of external pressure, viz. the pressure of the surrounding vater. 9. Also, if we take a smooth cylindrieal tube, shut at one end, and fit a plug or cork to its open end,  as to slide along it, but 50 tightly as to prevent all passage by its sides; and iſ the plug be well soaked in grease, we shal find that no force whatever can push it to the bottom oſ the tubee. There is therefore something within the tube preventing, by its impenetrability, the entry of the ꝑlug, and thereſore possessing this characteristic of matter. IO. In like manner, if, aſter having opened a pair o common bellows, we shut up the nozzle and valve hole, and try to bring the boards together, we find it impossible There is something included which prevents this, in the same manner as if the bellows were filled with wool; bui on opening the nozzle we can easily shut them, viz. by æpelling this something; and if the compression is forcible, the something will issue with considerable force, mã very sensibly impel any thing in its way. lI. It is not accurate to say, that we move about vithout any obstruction; for we find, that if we endeavour b move a large fan with rapidity, a very sensible hinderanc is perceived, and that a very sensible force must be exerted; and a sensible wind is produced, which will agitate the neighbouring bodies. It is therefore justly concluded, that the motion is possible only in consequence of having driven this obstrueting substance out of the way; and that this impenetrable, resisting, moveable, impelling substanæ is matter. We perceive the perseverance of this matter in its state oſ rest hen we vave a ſan, in the same manner that we perceive the inertia of water hen we move a paddle through it. The effects of wind in impelling our ships and mills, in tearing up trees, and overturning buildings, are equal indications of its perseverance in a state of motion. To this matter, when at rest, we give the name Anæ; and when iĩt is in motion ve eall it WixD. Air, thereſore, is a material fluid: a fluid, because ils parts are easily moved, and yield to the smallest inequality of pressure. 5 Air possesses some others of the very general, though not essential, properties oſ matter. It is heavy. This appears ſrom the following facts: I. It always accompanies this globe in its orbit round the sun, surrounding it to a certain distance, under the name of the AruosPHERE, Which indicates the being eonnected vith the earth by its general ſorce of gravity. It is chiefly in consequence of this that it is contmually moving round the earth from east to west; forming what is called the trade-wind, to be more particularly considered afterwards. All that is to be observed on this subject at present is, that in consequence of the disturbing force of the sun and moon, there is an accumulation of the air of the atmosphere, in the same manner as of the waters oſ the ocean, in those parts of the globe which have the moon near their zenith or nadir: and as this happens successively, going from the east to the west (by the rotation of the earth round its axis in the opposite direction), the accumulated air must gradually flow along to form the elevation. This is chieſly to he observed in the torrid 2one; and the generality and regularity of this motion are greatly disturbed by the changes which are continually taking place in different parts oſ the atmosphere from eauses which are not mechanical. .2. It is in like manner owing to the gravity of the air that it supports the clouds and vapours which we see constantly floating in itt. We have even seen bodies of no inconsiderable weight float, and even rise, in the air. Soap bubbles, and balloons filled with inflammable gas; rise and float in the same manner as a cork rises in water: This phenomenon proves the weight of the air in the same manner that the swimming of a piece of wood indicates the weight oſ the water which supports it. 3. But we are not leſt to these refined observations for the prooſ of the air's gravity. We may observe familiar phenomena, which would he immediate consequences oſ the supposition that air is a heavy fluid, and, like other heavy ſluids, presses on the outsides of all bodies immersl in or surrounded by it. Thus, for instance, i wæ shut the nozzle and valve hole of a pair of bellows aſter having squeezed the air out of them, we shall find that a very great force, even some hundred pounds, is necessary ſor separating the boards They are kept together by the pressure of the heavy air which surrounds them in the same manner as if they were immersed in water. In lie manner, if we stop the end of a syringe after its piston ha been pressed down to the bottom, and then attempt © drav up the piston, we shall find a considerable foree necessary, viz. about 15 or 16 pounds for every square inch oſ the section of the syringee Exerting this ſorce, we can drav up the piston to the top, and we can hold it there; but the moment we cease acting, the piston rushes doWn and strikes the bottom. It is called a suction, as ve ſeel something as it were draving in the piston; but it is really the weight oſ the incumbent air pressing it in. And this obtains in every position of the syringe; because the air is a ſluid, and presses in every direction. Nay, ĩt presses on the syringe as well as on the piston; and if the piston he hung by its ring on a nail, the syringe requires foree draw it down (just as much as to drav the piston up:) and if it be let go, it will spring up, unless loaded vith at least 15 pounds for every square inch of its tranverse section, (see Fig. 2.) 4. But the most direet proof oſ the weight of the air is had by weighing a vessel empty of air, and then weighing it agaim when the air has been admitted; and this, as it is the most obvious consequence oſ its weight, has been asserted as long ago as the duys oſ Aristotle He says (i iua iv. 4.); That all bodies are heavy in their place extept fire: even air is heavy; for a blown bladder is heuvier than when it is empty. It is somewhat surprising: thut his followers should have gone into the opposite T opinion, while professing to maintain the doctrine of their æader. If ve take a very large and limber bladder, and 5queeze out the air very carefully, and weigh it, and then fill it till the wrinkles just begin to disa ppear, and weigh it again, ve shall find no difference in the weight. But this is not Aristotle's meaning; because the bladder consideræd as a vessel, is equally ſull in both eases, its dimensions being changedl. We cannot take the air out of a bladder without its immediately collapsing. But what would be true of a bladder would be equally true oſ any vessel. Thereſore, take a round vessel A (Fig. S.), fitted with a stopcock B, and syringe C. Fill the whole with water, and press the piston to the bottom of the syringe. Then keeping the cock open, and holding the vessel upright, with the syringe undermost, draw down the piston. The water vill ſollow it by its weight, and leave part of the vessel empty. Now shut the cock, and again push up the piston to the bottom of the syringe; the water escapes through the piston valve, as will be explained afterward: then opening the cock, and again drawing down the piston, more vater vill come out of the vessel. Repeat this operation till all the water have come out. Shut the cock, unscrew the syringe, and weigh the vessel very accurately. Now open the cock, and admit the air, and weigh the vessel again, it vill be ſound heavier than beſore, and this additional weight is the weight of the air which fills it; and it vill be found to be 528 grains, about an ounce and a fiſth avoirdupois, for every cubic foot that the vessel contains. Now, since a cubic foot of water would weigh 1000 ounces, this experiment would show that water is about 840 times heavier than air. The most acourate judgment of this kind of which we have met with an aceount, is that recorded by Sir George Shuckburgh, which is in the 67th vol. of the Philosophical Transactions, p. 560. From this it ſollows, that when the air is of the temperature 58, and harometer stands at 293 inches, the air is 836 times lighter Vou. III. 2L than water. But the experiment is not susceptible of suſſi-cient accuracy ſor determining the exact weight oſ a eubie ſoot of air. Its weight ĩs very small; and the vesel must be strong and heavy, so as to overload any balance that is sufficiently nice for the experiment. To avoid this inconvenience, the whole may be weighed in water, first loading the vessel so as to make it preponderate an ounce or two in the water. By this means the balance vill be loaded only with this small preponderancy. But even in this case there are considerable sourees of error, arising from changes in the specific gravity of the water and other causess The experiment has often been repeated with this view, and the air has been found at a medium to be about 840 times as light as water, but vith great variations, as may be expected from its very hetergencous nature, in consequence of its being the menstruum oſ almost every fluid, of all vapours, and even of most solid bodies; all which it holds in solution, forming a filuid perſcetly transparent, and of very different density according to its composition. It is found, for instance, that perſecũy pure air of the temperature of our ordinary summer, is considerably denser than when it has dissolved about half as much vater as it can hold in that temperature; and that vith this quantity of water the difference of density increases in proportion as the mass grows varmer, ſor damp air is more expansible by heat than dry air. Such is the result of the experiment suggested by Aristotle, evidently proving the weight of the air; and yet, as has been observed, the Peripateties, vho profess to follo the dictates of Aristotle, uniformly refused it this property. It vas a matter long debated among the philosophers of the last century. The reason was, that Aristotle, with that indistinetness and inconsistency which is observed in all his vritings which relate to matters oſ fact and experience, assigns a diſſerent cause to many phenomena which uny man led by common observation would aseribe to the 6 weight of the air. Of this kind is the rise of water in pumps and syphons, which all the Peripatetics had for ages mscribed to something which they called naturè's abhorrence f a vid. Aristotle had asserted (for reasons not our busimess to adduce at present), that all nature was full of being, and that nature abhorred a void. He adduces many facts, in whioh it appears, that if not absolutely impossible, ĩt is very diſficult, and requires great force, to produce o space void of matter. When the operation of pumps and syphons came to be known, the philosophers of Europe (ho had all embraced the Peripatetic doctrines) found in this fancied horror of a fancied mind (7hat else is this that nature abhors?) a ready solution of the phenomena. We shall state the facts, that every reader may seè what kinds of reasoning were received among the learned not two centuries ago. Pumps were then construeted in the following manner: A long pipe GB (Fig. 4) was set in the vater of the well A This was fitted with a sueker or piston C, having a long rod CF, and was furnished with a valve B at the bottom, and a lateral pipe DE at the place of delivery, also furnished with a valvee. The fact is, that if the piston be thrust down to the bottom, and then drawn up, the water will follow it; and upon the piston being again pushed down, the water shuts the valve B by its weight, and escapes, or is expelled at the valve E; and on draving up the piston again the valve E is shut, the water again rises aſter the piston, and is again expelled at its next descent. The Peripatetios explain all this by saying, that if the vater did not follow the piston there would be a void between them. But nature abhors a void; or a void is impossible: thereſore the water follows the piston. It is not worth while to criticise the wretehed reasoning in this pretence to explanationn It is all overturned by one observation. Suppose the pipe shut at the bottom, the piston can be dravn up, and thus a void produced. No, say the Peripatetics; and they speak of certain spirits, effluvia, æc. which occupy the placee But if 50, hy needs the water rise? This thereſore is not the cause of its ascent. It is a curious and important phenomenon. The sagacious Galileo seems to have been the ſirst ho seriously ascribed this to the weight of the airr Many before him had supposed air heavy; and thus explained the difficulty of raising the hoard of bellows, or the piston of a syringe, &c. But he distinotly applies to this allowed veight of the air all the consequences of hydrostatical laws; and he reasons as follows: The heavy air rests on the water in the cistern, and presses it with its weight. It does the same with the water in the pipe, and thereſore both are on a level; but if the piston, after being in contact with the surſace of the water, be drawn up, there is no longer any pressure on the surface oſ the water within the pipe; for the air now rests on the piston only, and thus oceasions a difficulty in drawing it up. The water in the pipe, therefore, is in the same situation as if more water were poured into the cistern, that is, as much as would exert the same pressure on its surface as the air doess In this case we are certain that the water will be pressed into the pipe, and ill raise up the water already in it, and follo it till it is equally high vithin and withoutt. The same pressure of the air shuts the valve E during the descent of the piston. (8æ Galileo's Discourses.) He did not wait for the very obvious objection, that if the rise of the water was the effect oſ the air's pressure, it would also be its measure, and would be raised and supported only to a certain height. He directly said so, and adduced this as a decisive experiment. If the horror of a void be the cause, says he, the water must rise to any height however great; but if it be owing to the pressure oſ the air, it will only rise till the weight of the water in the pipe is in equilibrio with the pressure of the air, acording to the common laws of hydrostatics. And he adds, that this is well known; for itt is a fact, that pumps will not dram water much above forty palms, although they may be made io propel or to lifi it to any height. He then makes an assertion, which, if true, will be decisivee Let a very long pipe, shut at one end, be ſilled with water, and Iet it be erected perpendicularly with the close end uppermost, and a stopper in the other end, and then its lower orifice immersed into a vessel of water; the water will subside in the pipe upon removing the stopper, till the remaining column is in equilibrio with the pressure of the external air. This experiment he proposes to the curious; saying, however, that he thought it unnecessary, there being already such abundant prooſi oſ the air's pressure. It is probable that the cumbersomeness of the necessary apparatus protracted the making of this experiment. Another equally conclusive, and much easier, vas made in 1642, aſter Galileo's death, by his Zealous and learned disciple Toricell. He filled a glass tube, close at one end, with mercury; judging, that if the support oſ the water was owing to the pressure oſ the air, and was the measure of this pressure, mercury would in like manner be supported by it, and this at a height which was also the measure of the air's pressure, and thereſore 13 times less than water. He had the pleasure oſ seeing his expectation verified in the completest manner; the mercury descending in the tube AB (Fig. 5.) and ſinally settling at the height B of 207 Roman inches: and he ſound, that when the tube was inclined, the point ſ was in the same horizontal plane with s in the upright tube, according to the received laws of hydrostatical pressuree The experiment was often repeated, and soon became famous, exciting great controversies among the philosophers about the possibility of a vacuum. About three years aſterwards the same experiment was published at Warsaw in Poland, by Valerianus Magnus as his own suggestion and discovery: but it appears plæin ſrom the letters of Roberval, not only that Toricelli was prior, and that his experiment was the generãl pie oſf discussion among the curious; but also highly probable that Valerianus Magnus was informed of it when at Rome, and daily conversant with those who had seen ĩt. He denies, however, even having heard of the name of Toricelli. This was the era oſ philosophical ardour; and we think that it was Galileo's invention and immediate application of the telescope which gave it vigour. Discoveries of the most wonderſul kind in the heavens, and which required no extent of previous knowledge to understand them, were thus put into the hands of every person who could purchase a spy-glass; while the high degree oſ eredihiſity which some of the discoveries, such as the phases of Venus and the rotation and satellites of Jupiter, gave to the Copernican system, immediately set the whole body oſ the learned in motion. Galileo joined to his ardour a great extent of learning, particularly of mathematical knowledge and sound logic, and was even the first ho formally united mathematies with physies; and his treatise on accelerated motion was the ſirst, and a precious fruit oſ ũhis union. About the years 1642 and 1644, ve find clubs of gentlemen associated in Oxford and London for the cultivation of knowledge by experiment; and beſore 1655 all the doctrines of hydrostatics and pneumatics were familiar there, established upon experiment. Mr Boyle procured a coalition and correspondence of these clubs, under the name of the Invisible and Philosophical Society. In May 1658, Mr Hooke finished for Mr Boyle an air-pump, vhich had employed him a long time, and occasioned him several journeys to London for things which the workmen of Oxford could not execute. He speaks of this as a great improvement on Mr Boyle's ovn pump, which he had been using some time beſoree Boyle thereſore must have in- vented his air-pump, and was not indebted for it to Schottus's accomt of Otto Guericks, published in his (Schottus) Mechanica Hydraulo-pneumatica in 1657, as he asserts ( Techna Curiosa). The Royal Society of London arose in 1656 from the coalition of these clubs, aſter 1b years co-operation and correspondencee The Montmorine Society at Paris had subsisted nearly about the same time; for we find Paschal in 1648 speaking oſ the meetings in the Sorbonne College, from which we know that society originatd. Nuremberg, in Germany, vas also a distinguished seminary of experimental philosophy. The magistrates, sensible of its valuable influence in manufactures, the source of the opulence and prosperity of their city, and many of them philosophers, gave philosophy a professed and muniſicent patronage, furnishing the philosophers with a copious apparatus, a place of assembly, and a ſund for the expense of their experiments; so that this was the first academy of sciences out of Italy under the patronage of government. In Italy, indeed, there had long existed institutions oſ this kind. Rome was the centre of churchgovernment, and the resort of all expectants for preſerment. The clergy were the majority of the learned in all Christian nations, and particularly of the systematic philosophers. Each, eager to recommend himself to notice, brought forward every thing that was curious; and they were the villing vehicles of philosophical communication. Thus the experiments of Galileo and Toricelli vere rapidly diſfused by persons of rank, the dignitaries of the church, or by the monks, their obsequious servants. Perhaps the recent defection of England, and the want of a residing embassy at Rome, made her sometimes late in receiving or spreading philosophical researches, and was the cause that more vas done there proprio Marte. We hope to be excused for this digression We were naturally led into it by the pretensions of Valerianus Magnus to originality in the experiment of the mercury sup- ported by the pressure of the air. Such is the strength o nationãl attachment, that there were not wanting some who found that Toricelli had borrowed his experment from Honoratus Fabri, vho had proposed and explimed it in 1641; but whoever knows the writings of Toricœlli, and Galileos high opinion of him, vill never think that he œuld need such helps. (See this surmise of Mounier in Schoti. Tech. Cur. III at the end.) Galileo must be considered as the author of the experiment when he proposes it to be made. Valerianus Magnus owns himself indebted to him ſor the principle and the contrivance of the experiment. It ĩs neither wonderſul that many ingenious men, of one opinion, and instructed by Galileo, should separately hit on so obvious a thing; nor that Toricelli, his immediate disciple, his enthusiastic amirer, and who was in the habits of corresponding vith him till his death, in 1642, should be the first to put it in pratice. It became the subject of dispute from the national urrogance and self-conceit of some Frenchmen, who have always shown themselves disposed to consider their nation as at the head of the republic of letters, and cannot brook the concurrence of any foreignerss Roberval was in this instance, however, the champion of Toricelli; but those who know his controversies with the mathematicians of France at this time vill easily account for this exception All now agree in giving Toricelli the honour of the ſirst invention; and it universally passes by the name oſ the ToricELLIAN ExrERIMENT. The tube is called the ToniCELLIAN TusE; and the space leſt by the mercury is called the ToricELLIA Vacuum, to distinguish it from the BovLEAN Vacuun, which is only an extreme rareſaction. The experiment was repeated in various forms, and with apparatus which enabled philosophers to examine several eſſects which the vacuum produced on bodies exposed in itt. This was done by making the upper part oſ the tube terminate in a vessl of some capacity, or communicate with BUCh à vessel, in which were included along with the mercury bodies on which the experiments were to be madeWhen the mercury had run out, the phenomena of these bodiĩes were careſully observed An objection vas made o the conclusion drawn ſrom Torcellis experiment, which appears formidable. If the Toricellian tube be suspended on the arm of a halance, it ĩs found that the counterpoise must be equal to the weight both of the tube and of the mercury it contains. This could not be, suy the objectors, if the mereury were supported by the air. It is evidently supported by the bolance; and this gave rise to another notion of the cause different from the peripatetic ſfuga vacui: a suspensive force, or rather attraction, was assigned to the upper part of the tube. But the true explanation of the phenomenon is most easy and satisſactory. Suppose the mercury in the cistern and tube to freeze, but without adhering to the tube, so that the tube could be freely drawn up and down. In this case the mercury is supported by the base, without any dependence on the pressure of the air; and the tube is in the same condition as before, and the slid mercury performs the office of a piston to this kind of syringe Suppose the tube thrust down iill the top of it touches the top of the mercury.. It is evident that it must be drawn up in opposition to the pressure o the external air, and it is precisely similar to the syringe already mentioned. The weight sustained thereſore by this arm of the balance is the weight of the tube and the downward pressure of the atmosphere on its top. The curiosity of philosophers being thus excited by this very manageable experiment, it was natural nov to try the original experiment proposed by Galileo. Accordingly Berti in Italy, Paschal in France, and many others in diſferent places, made the experiment with a tube filled with vater, vine, oil, &e. and all with the suecess which might be expected in s0 simple a matter: and the doctrine of the weight and pressure oſ the air was established beyond contradiction or doubt. All was done beſore the year 1648A very beautiful experiment wvas exhihited by Auzout, which completely satisfied all Who had any remaining doubts. A small box or phial EFGH Fig. 6.) had two glas tubes, AB, CD, three feet long, inserted into it in such a manner as to be firmly fixed in one end, and to reach neaærly to the other end. AB was open at both ends, and CD was close at D. This apparatus was completely filled with mereury, by unscrewing the tube AB, filling the box, and the hole CD; then serewing in the tube AB, and filling it: then holding a finger on the orifico A, the whole was inverted and set upright in the position represented in figure 3, immersing the oriſice A (now a) in a small vessel of quicksilver. The result was, that the mereury ran out at the orifice a, till its surface m n within the phial descended to the top of the tube b a. The mercury also began to descend in the tube d c (formerly DC) and run over into the tube b a, and ran out at a, till the mercury in de was very near equal in the level with m n. The mercury descending in b a till it stood at k, 24 inches above the surface o ꝓ of the mercury in the cistern, just as in the Toricellian tube. The rationale of this experiment is very easy. The whole apparatus may first be considered as a Toricellian tube of an uncommon shape, and the mercury would flow out at . But as soon as a drop of mercury comes out, leaving a space above m n, there is nothing to keep up the mereury in the tube d . Its mercury thereſore descends also; and running over into b a, continues to supply its expense till the tube d c is almost empty, or can no longer supply the waste of b a. The inner surſace thereſore ſalls us low as it can, till it is level with  No more mercury can enter b a, yet its column is too heavy to be supported by the pressure of the air on the mercury in the cistern below; it therefore descends in b a, and finally settles at the height æ o, equal to that of the mercury in the Toricellian tube. The prettiest circumstance of the experiment remains. Make a small hole  in the upper cap of the box. The external air immediately rushes in by its weight, and now presses on the mercury in the box. This immediately raises the mercury in the tube de to I, 2; inches above m n. It presses on the mercury at k in the tube b a, balancing the pressure of the air in the cistern. The mercury in the tube therefore is leſt to the influence of its own weight, and it descends to the bottom. Nothing can be more apposite or decisive: And thus the doctrine of the gravity and pressure of the air is established by the 'most unexceptionable evidence: and ve are entitled to assume it as a statical principle, and to affirm à priori all its legitimate consequences. And, in the first place, e obtain an exact measure of the pressure oſ the atmosphere It is precisely equal to the weight of the column of mercury, of water, of oil, &e. which it can support; and the Toricellian tube, or others fitted up upon the same principle, are justly termed baroacopes and barometers with respect to the air. Now it is observed that water is supported at the height of 32 ſeet nearly: The weight of the column is exactly 2000 avoirdupois pounds in every square foot of base, or 18 on every square inch. The same conclusion very nearly may be dravn from the column of mercury, which is nearly 293 inches high when in equilibrium with the pressure oſ the air. We may here observe, that the measure taken from the height of a column of water, wine, spirits, and the other fluids of considerable volatility, as chemists term it, is not so exact as that taken from mercury, oil, and the likee For it is observed, that the volatile fluids are converted by the ordinary heat of our climates into vapour vhen the confining pressure of the air is removed; and this vapur, by its elasticity, exerts a small pressure on the surface of hhe water, &c. in the pipe, and thus counteracts a small part of the external pressure; and therefore the eolumn supported by the remaining pressure must be lighter, that is, shorter. Thus it is found, that rectified spirits will not stand much higher than is competent to a weight of I8 pounds on m inch, the elasticity oſ its vapour halancing about ,3; of the pressure of the air. We shall aſterwards have occasion n consider this matter more particularly. As the medium height of the mereury in the barometer is 294 inches, we see that the whole globe sustains a presure equal to the whole weight of a body of mereury oſ this height; and that all bodies on its surſace sustain a part of this in proportion to their surfaces. An ordinary-sized man sustains a pressure of several thousand pounds. How comes it then that we are not sensible of a pressure which one should think enough to crush us together? This has been considered as a strong objection to the pressure oſ the air; for when a man is plunged a few feet under vater, he is very sensible of the pressuree The answer is by no means 80 easy as is commonly imagined. We feel very distinetly the effects of removing this pressure from any part of the body. If any one vill apply the open end of a syringe o his hand, and then drav up the piston, he will find his hand sucked into the syringe with great force, and it vill give pain; and the soſt part of the hand will swell into it, being pressed in by the neighbouring parts, which are subject to the action of the external air. If one lays his hand on the top oſ a long perpendicular pipe, such as a pump filled to the brim with water, which is at first prevented from running out by the valve helow; and if the valve be then opened, so that the water descęnds, he vill then find his hand so hard pressed to the top of the pipe that he cannot draw it avay But why do we only feel the inequality oſ pressure? There is a similar instance wherein we do not feel it, although we cannot doubt of its existencee When a man goes slowly to a great depth under water in a diving-bell, ve know unquestionably that he is exposed to a new and very great pressure, yet he does not feel it. But those facts are not suſficiently familiar for general argument. The human body is a bundle of solids, hard or soſt, filled or mixed with fluids, and there are few or no parts oſ it which are empty. All communicate either by vessels or pores; and the whole surface is a sieve through which the insensible perspiration is performed. The whole æxtended surface of the lungs is open to the pressure of the atmosphere; every thing is therefore in equilibrio; and iĩf free or speedy access be given to every part, the body will not be damaged by the pressure, however great, any more than a wet sponge would be deranged by plunging it any depth in vater. Thẽè pressure is instantaneously diſfused by means of the incompressible fluids ith which the parts ure filled; and if any parts are filled with air or other compressible fluids, these are compressed till their elasticity again halances the pressure. Besides, all our fluids are acquired slowly, and gradually mixed with that proportion of air which they can dissolve or contain. The whole animal has grown up in this manner from the first vital atom of the embryo. For such reasons the pressure can occa5ion no change of shape by squeezing together the flexible parts; nor any obstruction by eompressing the vessels or pores. We cannot say what would be felt by a man, were it possible that he could have been produeed and grown up in vucuo, and then subjected to the compressionn. We even know that any sudden and considerable change of general pressure is very severely felt. Persons in a diving-bell have been almost killed by letting them down or drawing them up too suddenly. In dravwing up, the elastic matters vithin have suddenly swelled, and not finding an imme- diate escape, have burst the vesselss. Dr Halley experienced this, the blood gushing out ſrom his eas by the expasion of air contained in the internal cavities of this organ, ſrom which there are but very slender passages. A very important observation recurs here: the pressure of the atmosphere is variablee This was observed almos as soon as philosophers began to attend to the barometer. Paschal observed it in France, and Descartes observed ĩ in Sweden in 1650. Mr Boyle and others observed ĩt n England in 1656. And before this, observers, vho tmk notice of the concomitancy of these changes of aerial pre sure vith the state of the atmosphere, remarked, that ũt was generally greatest in winter and in the night; and certainly most variable during winter and in the northem regions. Familiar now with the weight of the air, and cmsidering it as the vehicle of the clouds and vapours, they noted with care the connexion between the weather and the pressure of the air, and found that a great pressure of the air was generally accompanied with fair weather, and a diminution of it with rain and mistss. Hence the barometer came to be considered as an index not only oſ the present state oſ the airs weight, but also as indicating by ils variations changes of weather. It became a WEATHER-GLASS, and continued to be anxiously observed with this view. This is an important subject, and will aſterwards be treated in some detail. In the next place, ve may conclude that the pressure of the air will be different in different places, according to their elevation above the surface of the ocean: for if air be an heavy fluid, it must press in some proportion according to its perpendicular height. If it be a homogeneous ſluid of equal density and weight in all its parts, the mercury in the cistern of a barometer must be pressed precisely in proportion to the depth to which that cistern is immersed in it; and as this pressure is exactly measured by the height of the mercury in the tube, the height oſ the mer- cury in the Toricelliam tube must be exactly proportional to the depth oſ the place oſ observation under the surface of the atmosphere. The celebrated Descartes first entertained this thought (Epist. 6. of Pr. IIL.), and soon aſter him Paschal. His occupation in Paris not permitting him to try the justness of his conjecture, he requested Mr Perrier, a gentleman of Clermont in Auvergne, to make the experiment by observing the height of the mercury at one and the same time at Clermont and on the top of a very high mountain in the neighbourhoodc. His letters to Mr Perrier in 1647 are still extant. Accordingly Mr Perrier, in September 1648, filled two equal tubes with mercury, and observed the hæights of both to be the same, viz. 267,; inches, in the gorden of the convent of the Friars Minims, situated in the lowest part of Clermont. Leaving one of them there, and one of the fathers to observe it, he tookthe other to the top oſPuy de Dome, which was elevated nearly 500 French fathoms above the gardenn He ſound its height to be 23; inches. On his return to the town, in a place called Font de  Arbre, 150 fashoms above the garden, he found it 2 inches; when he returned to the garden it was again 267,, and the person set to watch the tube which had been left said that it had not varied the whole day. Thus a difference of elevation oſ 8000 French feet had occasioned a depression of 3 inches; from which it may be coneluded, that à inches of mercury weighs as much as 000 feet of air, and one- tenth of an inch of mercury as much as 96 feet of air. The next day he ſound, that taking the tube to the top oſ a steeple 120 feet high made a ſall of one-sixth of an inch. This gives 72 feet oſ air for one-tenth of an inch of mereury; but ill agreeing vith the former experiment. But it is to be observed, that a very small error of observation of the barometer would correspond to a great diſference of elevation, and also that the height of the mountain had not been measured with any precision. This has been since done Mem. Acad. par. 1708), and found to be 529 French toises. Paschal published an account of this great experiment (Grande Exp. sur la Pesanteur de  Air), md it was quickly repeated in many places of the world. In 1653, it was repeated in England by Dr Power (Power's Exper. Phil.); and in Scotland, in 1661, by Mr Sinclair, profesor of philosophy in the university of Glasgow, who observed the barometer at Lanark, on the top of mount Tintock in Clydesdale, and on the top of Arthur's Seat at Edinburgh. He found a depression of two inches between Glasgow and the top of Tintock, three quarters of an inch between the bottom and top of Arthur's Seat, and i: oſ an inch at the cathedral of Glasgow on the height of 12 feet See Sinclairs 4rs Nova et Magna Grovilatis et Levitaſis; Sturmii Collegium Experimentale, and Schotti Technia Curioso. Hence we may derive a method of measuring the height of mountainss. Having ascertained with great precision the elevation corresponding to a fall of one-tenth of aa inch of mercury, which is nearly 90 feet, we have only to observe the length of the mercurial column at the top and bottom of the mountain, and to allow 90 ſeet for every tenth of an ineh. Accordingly this method has been practised with great success: but it requires an attention o many things not yet considered; such as the ehange oſ density oſ the mercury by heat and eold; the changes of density oſ air, which are much more remarkable ſfrom the same eauses; and, above all, the changes of the density of air ſfrom its compressibility; a change immediately counecied vith or dependent on the very elevation ve wish © measure. Of all these aſtervards. These observations give us the most acourate measur of the density oſ the air and its speciſie gravity. This is but vaguely though directly measured by weighing air in a bladder or vesse. The veight of a manageahle quautity l is s0 small, that a balance suſficiently ticklish to indieate even very sensible fractions oſ it is overloaded by the weight of the vessel which contains it, and ceases to be exact: and vhen ve take Bernoulli's ingenious method of suspending it in water, we expose ourselves to great risk of error by the variation oſ the waters density. Also it must necessarily be humid air which we can examine in this way: but the proportion of an elevation in the atmosphere to the depression of the column of mercury or other fluid, by which we measure its pressure, gives us at once the proportion of this weight or their speciſic gravity. Thus, since it is found that in such a state of pressure that the barometer stands at 0 inches, and the thermometer at 399, 87 feet oſ rise produces one-tenth of an inch of fall in the barometer, the air and the mercury being both of the freeæing temperature, ve must conclude that mercury is 10,440 times heavier or denser than air. Then, by comparing mercury and water, we get, 3; nearly, for the density of air relative to water: but this varies so much by heat and moisture, that it is useless to retain any thing more than a general notion of it; nor is it easy to determine whether this method or that by actual weighing is preferable. It is extremely diſficult to observe the height of the mercury in the barometer nearer than ,5 oſ an inch; and this will produce a difference of even ſive feet, or 45; of the whole. Perhaps this is a greater proportion than the error in weighing. From the same experiments ve also derive some knowledge of the height oſ the aerial covering which surrounds our globee When we raise our barometer 87 feet above the surſace oſ the sea, the mercury falls about one-tenth of an inch in the barometer: therefore if the barometer shows 30 inches at the sea- shore, we may expect that, by raising' it. 300 times 87 ſeet, or five miles, the mereury in the tube vill descend to the level of the cistern, and that this is the height of our atmospheree But other appearances lead us Vou. III. 2M to suppose a much greater height. Meteors are seen vith us much higher than this, and which yet give undoubted indieation of being supported by our air. There can be little doubt, too, that the visibility of the expanse above us is owing to the reflection of the sun's light by our ar. Were the heavenly spaces perfectly transparent, we should no more see them than the purest water through which we see other objects; and we see ſhem as ve see water tinged with milk or other fæculæ. Now it is easy to shov, that the light which gives us what is called tvilight must be reflected from the height of at least 50 miles; ſor we have it when the sun is depressed 18 degrees below our horizon. A little attention to the constitution of our air will convince us, that the atmosphere must extend to a much greater height than 800 times 87 feet. We see from the most familiar ſacts that it is compressible; we can squeeæ it in an ox bladder. Tt is also heavy; pressing on the air n this bladder with a very great force, not less than 1500 pounds. We must therefore consider it as in a state oſ compression, existing in smaller room than it would assume if it were not compressed by the incumbent air. It must therefore be in a condition something resembling that of a quantity of fine carded wool thrown loosely into a deep pit; the lower strata carrying the weight of the upper strata, and being compressed by them; and so much the more compressed as they are further down, and only the upper stratum in its unconstrained and most expanded state. I we shall suppose this wool thrown in by a hundred veight at a time, it vill be divided into strata of equal weights, but of unequal thickness; the lowest being the thinnest, and the superior strata gradually mcreasimg in thickness. Now, suppose the pit filled with air, and reaching to the top of the atmosphere, the ueights of all the strata above any horizontal plane in it is measured by the height oſ the mercury in the Tor eellian tube placed in that plane; and one-tenth oſ an inch of mercury is just equal to the weight of the lowest stratum 87 feet thick: for on raising the tube 87 feet from the sea, the surſace oſ the mercury vill descend one-tenth of an inch. Raise the tube till the mereury fall another tenth: this stratum must be more than 57 feet thick; how much more we cannot tell, being ignorant of the law of the airs expansion. In order to make it fall a third tenth, ve must raise it through a stratum still thicker; and s0 on continually. All this is abundantly confirmed by the very first experiment made by the order and directions of Paschal: for by carrying the tube from the garden of the convent to a place 150 fathoms higher, the mereury fell 17 inches, or 1,2017; which gives about 69 feet 8 inches of aerial stratum for ;4; oſ an inch of mereury; and by carrying it from thence to a place 350 fathoms higher, the mercury fell 135, or 1,9167 inches, which gives 109 feet 7 inches ſor 75 of an inch of mercury These experiments were not accurately made; for at that time the philosophers, though zealous, were but scholars in the science of experimenting, and novices in the artt. But the results abundantly show this general truth, and they are completely confirmed by thousands of subsequent observations. It is evident from the whole tenor oſ them, that the strata of air decrease in density as e ascend through the atmosphere; but it remained to be discovered what is the force of this decrease, that is, the law of the air's expunsion. Till this be done we can say nothing about the constitution of our atmosphere; we cannot tell in what manner iĩt is fittest for raising and supporting the exhalations and vapours which are contmually arising from the inhabited regions; not as an excrementitious waste, but to be supported, perhaps manuſactured, in that vast laboratory of nature, and to be returned to us in beneficent showers We cannot use our knovledge for the curious, and frequently useſul, purpose of measuring the heights of mountãins and taking the levels of extensive regions; in short, without an accurate knowledge of this, ve ean hardly acquire any acquaintance with those mechanical properties which distinguish air from those liquids which cireulate here below. Having thereſore considered at some length the leading consequences of the air's fluidity and gravity, let us consider its compressibility with the same care; and then, combining the agency of both, we shall answer all the purposes oſ philosophy, discover the laws, explain the phenomena of nature, and improve art. We proceed therefore to consider a little the phenomena which indicate and characterise this other property oſ the air. All fluids are elastic and compressible as well as air; but in them the compresibility makes no figure, or does not interest us while we are considering their pressures, motions, and impulsions But in air the compressibility and expansion draw our chief attention, and make it a proper representative of this clas of fluids. Nothing is more familiar than the compressibility of air. It is seen in a bladder filled with it, which we can ſorcibly squeeze into less room; it is seen in a syringe, of vhich e can push the plug farther and ſarther as we increase the pressure. But these appearances bring into view another, and the most interesting, property oſ air, viz. its elasticity. When we have squeezed the air in the bladder or syringe into less room, ve find that the force with which we compressed it is necessary to keep it in this bull; and that if we cease to press it together, it will swell 'out and regain its natural dimensions This distinguishes it essentially from such a body as a mass of ſlour, salt, or such like, which remain in the compressed state to which ve reduce them. There is therefore something which opposes the compression different from the simple impenetrability of the i there is something that opposes mechanical force;  is something too which produces motion, not only re- sisting compression, but pushing back the compressing body, and communicating motion to it. As an arrow is gradually accelerated by the how-string pressing it forward, and at the moment of its discharge is brought to a state of rapid motion; so the ball from a pop-gun, or wind. gun, is gradually accelerated along the barrel by the pressure of the air during its expansion from its compressed state, and finally quits it with an accumulated velocity. These two motions are indications perfectly similar of the elasticity of the bow and of the air. i Thus it appears that air is henvy and elastie. It needs little consideration to convince us in a vague manner that it is fluid. The ease with which it is penetrated, and driven about in every direction, and the motion of it in pipes and channels, however crooked and intricate, entitle it to this chãracter. But before e can proceed to deduce consequences from its fluidity, and to offer them as a true account of vhat will happen in these circumstances, it is necessary to exhibit some distinet and simple case, in which the characteristic mechanical property of a fluid is clearly and unequivocally observed in it. That property oſ fluids from which all the laws oſ hydrostatics and hydraulies are derived vith strictest evidence is, that any pressure applied to any part of them is propagated through the whole mass in every direction; and that, in consequence of this diffusion oſ pressure, any two external forces can he put in equilibirio by the interposition of a fluid, in the same way as they can be put in equilibrio by the intervention of any mechanical engine. Let a close vessel ABC (Fig. 7.), of any form, have two upright pipes EDC, GFB, inserted into any parts of its top, sides, or bottom, and let water be poured into them, so as to stand in equilibrio with the horĩzontal surfaces at E, D, G, F, and let D q, Ff, be horzontal lines, it ill be found that the height of the column E d, is sensibly equal to that oſ& the column G. This is a fact universally observed in whatever way the pipes are inserted. Now the surſace of the water at D is undoubtedly pressed upwards with a force equal to a column of water, having its surface for its base, and E d for its height; it s therefore prevented from rising by some opposite foræ This can be nothing but the elasticity oſ the confined air pressing it down. The very same thing must be said of the surface at P; and thus there are two external pres sures at D and F set in equilibrio by the interposition of air. The foree exerted on the surface D, by the pressure of the column E d, is thereſore propagated to the surface at F; and thus air has this characteristic mark oſ fluidity. In this experiment the weight o the air is insensible when the vessel is of small size, and has no sensible share in the pressure reaching at D and F. But if the elevation of the point F above D is very great, the column E d uill be observed sensibly to exceed the columi G. Thus if F be T0 feet higher than D, E d will be an inch longer than the column Gf: for in this case there is reacting at D, not only the pressure propagated ſrom F, but also the weight of a column of air, having the surſace at D ſor its base and 70 feet high. This is equal to the veight oſ a column of water one inch high. 1It is by this propagation of pressure, tis sluidity, that the pellet is discharged from a childs pop-gun. It sticks fast in the muzzle; and he forces in another pellet at the other end, which he presses forward with the rammer, condensing the air between them, and thus propagating to the other pellet the pressure which he exerts, till the ſriotion is overcome, and the pellet is discharged by the air expanding and following it. There is a pretty philosophical plaything which illutrates this property of air in a very perspicuous manner, and which ve shall aſterwards have occasion to consider as converted into a most useful hydraulic machine. This is what is usually called Hero's fountain, having been inventæd by a Syracusan oſ that name. It consists of two vessels KLMN (Fig 8.), OPQR, which are close on all sides. A tube AB, having a fumnel a-top, passes through the uppermost vessel without communicating with it, being solclered nto its top and bottom- It also passes through the top oſ the under-vessel, where it is also soldered, and reaches almost to its bottom. This tube is open at both ends. There is another open tube ST, which is soldered into the top of the under-vessel and the bottom oſ the upper-vesel, and reaches almost to its top. These two tubes serve also to support the upper-vessel. A third tube GF is soldered into the top of the upper vessel, and reaches almost toĩts bottom. This tube is open at both ends, but the oriſice G is very small. Now suppose the uppermost vessel ſilled with water to the height EN, E æ being its surſace a little below T. Stop the oriſice G with the ſinger, and pour in water at A This will descend through AB, and compress the air in OQRP into less room. Suppose the water in the under vessel to have acquired the surſace C c, the air vhich formerly occupied the whole of the spaces OPQR and KL e E vill now be contaimed in the spaces o P o C and KL ? E; and its elasticity will be in equilibrio with the weight oſ the column of water, whose base is the surface E e, and whose height is Ac. As this pressure is exerted n every part of the air, it will be exerted on the surface Ee of the water oſ the upper vessel; and if the pipe FG were continued upwards, the water would be supported in it to an height æ H above E ę, equal to Ae. Therefore if the finger be now taken from off the oriſice G, the water vill spout up to the same height as if it had been immediately forced out by a column of water A c without the intervention of the air, that is, nearly to H. If instead oſ the funnel at A, the vessel have a brim which will cause the water discharged at G to run down the pipe AB, this fountain vill play till all the water in the upper vesl is expended. The operation of this second fountain will be better understood ſrom Fig. 9. vhich an intelligent reader vill see is perſectly equivalent to Fig. 5E. A very poverful engine for raising water upon this principle has long been employed in the Hungarian mines; where the pipæ AB is about 200 ſeet high, and the pipe FG about 120; and the condensation is made in the upper vessel, and communicated to the lower, at the bottom of the mine, by a long pipe. We may now apply to air all the laws of hydrostatio and hydraulies, in perſect confidence that their legitimate consequences vill be observed in all its situations. We shall in future substitute, in place of any foree acting on a surface of air, a column of water, mereury, or any other fluid whose weight is equal to this force: and as we know distinetly from theory what will be the consequences of this hydrostatic pressure, we shall determine à priori the phenomena in air; and in cases where the theory does not enable us to say with precision vhat is the efſect oſ this pressure, experience inſorms us in the case oſ water, and analogy enables us to transſer this to air. We shall find this of great servicæ in some cases, which othervise are almost desperate in the present state of our hnowledge. From such familiar and simple observations and experiments, the fluidity, the heaviness, and elasticity, are disœvered of the substance with which we are surrounded, and vhich we call air. But to understand these properties, and completely to explain their numerous and important consequences, ve must call in the aid of more refined observations and experiments which even this scanty knovledge of them enablesus to make; we must contrive some methods oſ producing with precision any degree oſ condensation or rarefaction, of employing or excluding the gravitating pres- sure of air, and of modiſying at pleasure the action of all its mechanical properties. Nothing can be more obvious than a method of comPpressing a quantity of air to any degree. Take a eylinder or prismatic tube AB (Fig. 10.) shut at one end, and fit it with a piston or plug C, so nicely that no air can pass by its sides. This will be best done in a cylindric tube by a turned stopper, covered vith oiled leather, and fitted with a long handle CD. When this is thrust down, the air which formerly occupied the whole eapacity of the tube is condensed into less roomm The force necessary to produce any degree of compression may be concluded from the weĩght necessary ſor pushing down the plug to any depth. But this instrument leaves us little opportunity of making interesting experiments on or in this condensed air; and the force required to make any degree of compression cannot be measured vith mueh accuracy; because the piston must be very close, and have great friction, in order to be suſficiently tight: and as the compression is increased, the leather is more squeezed to the side oſ the tube; and the proportion of the external force, which is employed merely to overcome this variable and uncertain friction, cannot be ascertained with any tolerable precision. To get rid of these imperſections, the following addition may be made to the instrument, which then becomes what is called the condensing syringe. i The end of the syringe is perforated with a very small hole ę ſ; and being externally turmed to a small eylinder, a narrow slip of bladder, or of thin leather, soaked in a mixture oſ oll and tallow, must be tied over the hole. Nov let us suppose the piston pushed down to the bottom of the barrel to which it applies close; when it is dravn up to the top, it leaves a void behind, and the weight of the external air presses on the slip of bladder, which theresore claps close to the brass, and thus perſorms the part of a valve, and keeps it close, 50 that no air can enter. But the piston having reached the top of the barrel, a huæ F in the side oſf it is just below the piston, and the ar rushes through this hole and ſills the barre Now push the piston down again, it immediately pases the hole F, and no air escapes through it; it therefore forcs open the valve at , and escapes while the piston moves  the bottom. Nov let E be any vessel, such as a glass bottle, having its mouth furnished with a brass cap firmly comented  i, having a hollow serew which fits a slid serew ꝓo, tumed on the cylindric noz⸗le of the syringe. S8crew the syringe into this cap, and it is evident that the air forced out of the syringe vill be accumulated in this vessel: for upon draving up the piston the valve ſ always shuts by the elasticity or expanding force of the air in E; and on pushing it doWn again, the valve ill open as soon as the piston has got far down that the air in the lower part of the barrel is mor poverful than the air already in the vessel. Thus at every stroke an additional barrelful of air will be forcœd nto the vessel E; and it will be found, that after every stroke the piston must be farther pushed down before the valve vill open. It canmot open till the pressure arising from the elasticity oſ the air condensed in the barrel is superior to the elasticity oſ the air condensed in the vessel; that is till the condensation of the first, or its density, is omenhat greater than that of the last, in order to overcome the straining of the valve on the hole and the sticking oecationed by the clammy matter employed to make it air-tight Sometimes the syringe is constructed with a valve m the piston. This piston, instead of being of one piece and lid, eonsists of two pieces performtedl. The upper part i Io n m is connected with the rod or handle, and has its lower part turned down to a small eylinder, which is screwed into the lower part lon; and has a perforation h going up in the axis, and terminating in a hole h in one side of the rod, a piece oſ viled leather is strained across the m gradually diminishes as the water is expended and roon given to the air to expand itself. See the figure. We judge of the condensation of air in the vessel E br the number of strokes and the proportion of the capacity o the syringe to that of the vesse. Suppose the first to one-tenth of the last; then wve know, that after 10 stroke the quantity of air in the vessel is doubled, and therefor its density double, and s0 on ater any number of strokes Let the capacity of the syringe (hen the piston is dra=n to the top) be a, and that of the vessel be b, and the number of strokes be n, the density of the air in the vessl wil be æ orl + V But this is on the supposition that the piston accurately ſills the barrel, the bottom of the one applying close to thai oſf the other, and that no force is necessary ſor opening either of the valves: but the ſirst cannot be ensured, and the last is very ſar from being true In the construction now described, ĩt will require at least one- twentieth part of the ordinary pressure of the air to open the piston valve: thereſore the air vhich gets in will want at least this proportion of its complete elasticity ; and there is always a similar part of the elasticity employed in opening the nozæle valvee. The condensation therefore is never nearly equal to what is here determined. It is accurately enough measured by a gage fitted to the instrument. A glass tube GH of a cylindric bore, and close at the end, is screwed into the side of the eap on the mouth of the vessel EA small drop of water or mereury is taken into this tube by warming it a little in the hand, which expands the contained air, so that vhen the open end is dipped into water, and the whole allowed to ol, the water advances a little into the tubee. The tube is furnished vith a scale divided into small equal parts, numbered from the close end of the tube. Since this tube communicates with the vessel, it is evident that the condensa- tion vill ſorce the water along the tube, acting like a piston on the air beyond it, and the air in the tube and vessel will always be oſ one density. Suppose the number at which the drop stands before the condensation is made to be c, and that it stands at d when the condensation has attained the degree required, the density of the air in the remote end of the gage, and consequently in the vessel, will be & a Sometimes there is used any bit of tube close at one end, having a drop of water in it, simply laid into the vessel E, and furnished or not with a scale: but this can only be used with glass vessels, and these are too wea to resist the pressure arising ſrom great condensation. In such experiments metalline vessels are used, fitted with a variety of apparatus ſor diſferent experiments. Some of these will be occasionally mentioned afterwards. It must be observed in this place, that very great condensations require great force, and thereſore small syringes. It is therefore convenient to have them of various sizes, and to begin with those oſ a larger diameter, which operate more quickly; and wvhen the condensation becomes fatiguing, to change the syringe for a smaller. or this reason, and in general to make the condensing apparatus more convenient, it is proper to have a stop-cock interposed between the syringe and the vessel, or, as it is usually called, the receiver. This consists of a brass pipe, which has a vell-ground cock in its middle, and has æ hollow screw at one end, which receives the nozzle serew of the syring, and a solid serew at the other end, which fits the screw of the receiver. See Fig. S. By these gages, or contrivances similar to them, we have been able to astertain very great degrees of condensation in the course of some experiments. Dr Hales found that vhen dry wood was put into a strong vessel, which it almost filled, and the remainder was ſilled with water, the swelling of the wood, occasioned by its imhihation of water, condensed the air of his gage into the thousndth of its orginal bul. He found that pease treated in the same manner generated elastic air, which pressing on the ait n the gage condensed it into the fifteen hundredth part oſ ĩs bulk. This is the greatest condensation that has been a certained with precision, although in other experiments i has certainly been carried much farther; but the preciæ degree could not be ascertained. The only use to be made of this observation at present is, that since we have been able to exhibit air in a density a thousand times greater than the ordinary density of the air ve breathe, it cannot, as some imagine, be only a diſferent form of water; for in this state it is as dense or denser than water, and yet retains its great expansibility. Another important observation is, that in every state of density in which we find it, it retains its perfect fluidity, transmitting all pressures which are applied to it with undiminished ſorce, as appears by the equality constantly observed between the opposing columns of water or other fluid by which it is compressed, and by the ſacility with which all motions are performed in it in the most compressed states in vhich we can make observations oſ this kind. This fact is totally incompatible with the opimion of thoæ who ascribe the elasticity of air to the springy ramiſied structure of its particles, touching each other like so many pieces oſ sponge or foot-ballss A collection of such partcles might indeed be pervaded by solid bodies with conderable ease, if they were merely touching each other, mi not subjected to any external pressure But the moment such pressure is exerted, and the assemblage squeezed ino a smaller space, ench pressure on its adjoining particles: they are individually compressed, flattened in their touching surſaces, and before the densily is doubled they are squeezed into the ſorm of perfect cubes, and compose a mass, which may indeed propagate pressure from one place to another in an imperfect manuer, and vith great diminution of its intensity, but will no more be fluid than a mass of 30ft clay. It vill be of use to keep this observation in mind. We have seen that air is heavy and compressible, and might now proceed to deduce in order the explanation of the appearances consequent on each of these properties. But, as has been already observed, the elasticity oſ air modifies the effects oſ its gravity so remarkably, that they would be imperfectly understood if both qualities were not combined in our consideration of either. At any rate, some farther consequences of its elasticity must he considered, before we understand the means of varying at pleasure the effects of its gravity. Since air is heavy, the lower strata of a mass of air must support the upper; and, being compressible, they must be condensed by their weight. In this state of compression the elasticity of the lower strata oſ air acts in opposition to the weight of the incumbent air, and balances it. There is no reason which should make us suppose that its expanding force belongs to it only when in such a state of compression. It is more probable, that, if we could free it ſrom this pressure, the air would expand itselſ into still greater bulk. This is most distinetly seen in the following experiment: Into the oylindric jar ABCD (Fig. 1.), which has a small hole in its bottom, and is furnished with an air-tight piston E, put a small flaccid bladder, having its mouth tied tight with a string Having pushed the piston near to the bottom, and noticed the state of the bladder, stop up the hole in the bottom of the jar with the finger, and drav up the piston, hich will require a considerable foroo. You will observe the bladder swell out, as if air had been blown into it; and it will again collapse on allowing the piston to descend. Nothing can be more unexceptionable than the conclusion from this experiment, that ordinary air is in a state of compression, and that ĩts elasticity is not limited to this state. The bladder being flaccid, shows that the included air is in the same state with the æir which surrounds it; and the same must be affirmed of ĩt vhile it swells but still remains flaccidc. We must conclude that the whole air within the vessel expands, and continues to fill it, when its capacity has been enlarged. And sinœ this is observed to go on as long as we give it more rom, we conclude, that by such experiments we have not yet given it so much room as it can occupy. It was a natural object of curiosity to discover the ſimits of this expansion; to know what was the natural unconstrained bulk of a quantity of air, beyond which it vould not expand though all external compressing force were removed. Accordingly philosophers constructed instruments for raręfying the air. The common water-pump had been long familiar, and appeared very proper for this purpose The most obvious is the following: Let the barrel of the syringe AB (Fig. 12.) communicate vith the vessel V, with a stop-cock C between them. Let it communicate with the external air by another orifice D, in any convenient situation, also furnished vith a stop-cock. Let this syringe have a piston very accurately fitted to it, s0 as to touch the bottom all over when pushed down, and have no vacancy about the sides. Now suppose the piston at the bottom, the cock C open, and the cock D shut, draw the piston to the top. The air vhich filled the vessel V will expand 50 as to fill both that vessel and the barrel AB; and as no reason can be given to the contrary, we must suppose that the air will be uniformly diffused through both. Calling V and B the capacity of the vessel and barrel, it is plain that the bulk of the air will nov be V+B; and since the quantity of matter remains the same, and the density oſ a fluid is as its quantity of matter direelly and its bulk inversely, the density of  ua V . the expanded air will be vT5 the density oſ common air being 1: ſor V4 B: V1I. L The piston requires ſorce to raise it, and it is raised in opposition to the pressure of the incumbent atmosphere; for this had formerly been balanced by the elasticity oſ the common air: and we conclude from the fact, that force is required to raise the piston, that the elasticity of the expanded air is less than that of air in its ordinary state; and an accurate observation of the force necessary to raise it would show how much the elasticity is diminished. When therefore the piston ĩs let go, it will descend as long as the pressure of the atmosphere exceeds the elasticity oſ the air in the barrel; that is, till the air in the barrel is in a statè of ordinary density. To put it further down vill require force, because the air must be compressed in the barrel; but if we now open the coek D, the air will be expellod through it, and the piston vill reach the bottom. Now shut the discharging coct D, and open the cock C, and draw up the pistonn. The air which occupied the V V4B space V+ B, iſ it expands so far. To have its density D, say, As its present bulk V 4 B is to ĩts former space V, with the density vill now occupy the bulk V, so is its former density Vs to its new den: : Vxv sity ; which will therefore be vVTR or an V V4 B It is evident, that if the air continues to expand, the density of the air in the vessel aſter the third drawing up : : lILãũ . : oſ the piston will be v5 aſter the ſourth it will be Vou. III. 2N : vB  ana aſter any number oſ strokes n will be Thus, if the vessel is four times as large as the harrel, the density aſter the fifth stroke will be 3952, nearly ] oſ its ordinary density. On the other hand, the number n of strokes necessary for reducing air to the density D is Lꝶ Thus ve see that this instrument can never abstract the whole air in consequence oſ its expansion, but only rarefy it continually as long as it continues to expand; nay, there is a limit beyond which the rareſaction cannot go. When the piston has reached the bottom, there remains a small space between it and the cock C filled with common aiv. When the piston is drawn up, this small quantity of air expanis, and also a similar quantity in the neck of the other cock; and no air will come out of the receiver V till the air expanded in the barrel is of a smaller density than the air in the receiver. This circumstance evidently direets us to make these two spaces as small as possible, or by some contrivante to fill them up altogether. Perhaps this may be done effectually in the following manner: Let BE (Fig. 13.) represent the bottom of the barrel, and let the cirele HKI be the section of the key oſ the cock, of a large diameter, and place it as near to the barrel as can be. Let this communicate with the barrel by means of an hole FG widening upwards, as the frustum oſ a hollow obtuse cone. Let the bottom of the piston b7 hęe be shaped so as to fit the bottom of the barrel and this hole exactly. Let the cock be pierced with two holes One of them, HI, passes perpendicularly through its axis, and forms the communication between the receiver and barrel. The other hole, L, has one extremity K on the same circumference with H, 56 that when the key is tumed a ſourth part round, X will come into the place of H: but this hole is pierced obliquely into the key, and thus keeps clear of the hole HI. It goes no further than the axis, vhere it communicates with a hole bored along the axis and terminating at its extremity. This hole forms the communieation with the external air, and serves ſor discharging the air in the barre. (A side view of the key is seen in Fig. 14) Fig. I2. shows the position of the cook while the piston is moving upwards, and Fig. 14. shows its position while the piston is moving downwardss When the piston has reached the bottom, the conical piece ſ h g of the piston, hich may he oſ firm leather, fills the hole FHG, and thereſore completely expels the air from the barrel. The canal KL I of the cock contains air of the common density; but this is turned aside into the position KL Fig. 13.), while the piston is still touching the cock. ITt cannot expand into the barrel during the ascent of the piston. In place oſ iĩt, the perforation HLI comes under the piston, ſilled with air that had been turned aside with it vhen the piston was at the top of the barrel, and thereſore of the same density with the air of the receiver. It appears, therefore, that there is no limit to the rarefaction as long as the air will expand. This instrument is called an EXHAUSTING SYRINGE. It is more generally made in another form, which is mueh less expensive, and more convenient in its use. Instead of being furnished with cocks for establishing the communications and shutting them, as is necessary, it has valves like those of the condensing syringe, but opening in the opposite direction. It is thus made: The pipe of communication or conduit MN (Fig. 15.), has a male serew in its extremity, and over this is fied a slip of bladder or leather M. The lower half oſ the piston has also a male serew on it, covered at the end with a slip of bladder O. This is screwed into the upper half oſ the piston, which is pierced with a hole H coming out oſ the side of the rod. Now suppuse the syringe serewed to the conducting pipe, and that screwed into the receiver V and the piston at the bottom oſ the barre. When the piston is dravn up, the pressure oſ the external air shuts the valve O, md a void is leſt below the piston: there is therefore no prsure on the upper side of the valve M, to balance the elasticity of the air in the receiver which formerly balanced the weight of the atmospheree The air, thereſore, in the recciver lifts this valve, and distributes itsel? bet ween the vessel and the barrel; so that when the piston has reached the top, the density of the air in both receiver and harrel V VB When the piston is let go it descends, because the elastcity of the expanded air is not a balance for the pressure of the atmosphere, which therefore presses down the piston vith the difference, keeping the piston-valve shut all the vwhile At the same time the valve M also shuts: ſor it was opened by the prevailing elasticity of the air in the receiver, and while it is open, the two airs have equal density and elasticity; but the moment the piston descends, the capacity oſ the barrel is diminished, the elasticity of its air increases by collapsing, and now prevailing over that of the air in the receiver, shuts the valve M. When it has arrived at such a part of the barrel that the air in it is of the density of the external air, there is o force to push it farther down; the hand must thereſore press it. This attempts to condense the air in the baræl, and thereſore inereases its elasticity; so that it lifts the valve O and escapes, and the piston gets to the hottom. When drawvn up again, greater force is required than the last time, because the elasticity of the included air is les than in the former stroke. The piston rises further beſore the valve M is liſfted up, and when it has reached the op is as beſore  2 of the barrel the density oſ the included air is vn The piston, when let go, vill descend further than it did beſore ere the piston-valve open, and the pressure of the hand vill again push it to the bottom, all the air escaping through O. The rareſaction vill go on at every suecessive stroke in the same manner as with the other syringe. This syrnge is evidently more easy in its use, requiring no attendance to the cocks to open and shut them at the proper times. On this account this construction of an exhausting syringe is much more generally used. But it is greatly inferior to the syringe with cocks with respect to its power of rareſaction. Its operation is greatly limited. It is evident that no air will come out of the receiver unless its elasticity excoed that of the air in the barrel by a difference able to lift up the valve M. A piece of oiled lenther tied aeross this hole can hardly be made tight and certain of elapping to the hole without some small struining, which must therefore be overcome. It must be very gentle indeed not to require a force equal to the weight of two inches of water, and this is equal to ahout the 200th part of the whole elasticity of the ordinary air; and therefore this syringe, for this reason alone, cannot rareſy air above 200 times, even though air were capable of an indeſinite expansion. In like manner the valve O camot be raised without a similar prevalence of the elasticity of the air in the barrel above the weight of the atmosphere. These causes united, make iĩt diſfieult to rareſy the air more than I00 times, and very few such syringes will rarefy it more than 50 times; whereas the syringe with cocks, when new and in good order, will rarefy it 1000 times. But, on the other hand, syringes with cocks are much more expensive, especially when furnished with apparatus for opening and shutting the cocks. They are more diſficult to make equally tight, and (which is the greatest objection) do not remain long in good orde. The eocks, by so frequently opening and shutting, grow loose, and allow the air to escape. No method has been found of preventing thiss They must be ground tight by means of emery or other cutting powders. Some oſ these unavoidably stick in the metal, and continue to wear it down. For this reason philosophers, and the makers oſ philosophical instruments, have turned their chief attention to the improvement of the syringe with valves. We have bee thus minute in the account oſ the operation of rareſaction that the reader may better understand the value of theæ improvements, and in general the operation of the princpal pneumatic engines. Qf the Air-Pump. AN Aix-Puur is nothing but an exhausting syringe, accommodated to a variety oſ experiments. It was first invented by Otto Guericke, a gentleman oſ Magdeburg, in Germany, about the year 1654. We trust that it will not be unacceptable to our readers to see this instruments which now makes a principal article in a philosophical apparatus, in its first form, and to trace it through its sucessive steps to its present state oſ improvement Guericke, indiſferent about the solitary possession oſ an invention which gave entertainment to numbers vho came to see his vonderful experiments, gave a minute deseription of all his pneumatic apparatus to Gaspar Schottus, pro fessor of mathematics at Wirtemberg, vho immediately published it with the author's consent, with an aceount o some oſ its perſormances, ſirst in 1G657, in his Mechanica Hydraulico-pneumatica; and then in his Technica Curiosa, in 16G4, a curious collection oſ all the vonderſul perſormance of art which he collected by a correspondence over all Europe Otto Guericke's air-pump consists oſ a glass receiver A (Fig. 16.), of a form nearly spherical, fitted up with a bras cap and cock B. The nozzle of the cap was fixed o a syringe CDE, also oſ brass, bent at D into half a right angle. This had a valve at D, opening from the receiver into the syringe, and shutting vhen pressed in the opposite directionn. In the upper side oſ the syringe there is another valve F, opening from the syringe into the external air, and shutting vhen pressed inwards. The piston had no valvee. The syringe, the cock B, and the joint of the tube, were immersed in a cistern filled with water. From this description it is easy to understand the operation of the instrument. When the piston was drawn up from the bottom of the syringe, the valve F was kept shut by the pressure of the external air, and the valve D opened by the elasticity of the air in the receiver When it was pushed down again, the valve D immediately shut by the superior elasticity of the air in the syringe; and when this vas suſficiently compressed, it opened the valve F, and was diseharged. It was immersed in vater, that no air might find its way through the joints or eocks. It would seem that this machine was not very perfect, for Guericke says that it took several hours to produee an evacuation of a moderate-sized vessel; but he says, that vhen it was in good order, the rarefaction (for he acknowledges that it was not, nor could be, a complete evacuation) was so great, that vhen the cock was opened, and vater admitted, it filled the receiver s0 as sometimes to leave no more than the bulk of a pea filled with air. This is a little surprising; for if the valve F be placed as ſur from the bottom of the syringe as in Schottus's figure, it would appear that the rarefaction could not be grenter than what must arise from the air in DF expanding till it filled the whole syringe; because as soon as the piston in its descent passes F it can discharge no more air, but must compress it between F and the bottom, to be expanded again when the piston is draWn up. It is probable that the piston was not very tight, but that on pressing it down it allowed the air to pass it; and the vater in vhich the whole was immersed prevented the return of the air when it was dran up again; and this accounts for the great time necessary. for producing the desired rarefaction. Guericke, being a gentleman of fortune, spared no expense, and added a part to the machine, which saved his numerous visitants the trouble oſ hours attendance beſore they could see the curious experiments with the rarefied air. He made a large copper vessel G (Fig. 17.), having a pipe and cock helow, which passed through the floor of the chamber into an under apartment, where it was joined to the syringe immersed in the cistern of water, and worked by a lever. The upper part of the vessel terminated in a pipe, furnished with a stopooek H, surrounded with a small brim to hold water for preventing the ingress of air. On the top was another cap I, also filled with vater to protect the junction of the pipes with the receiver K. This great vessel was always kept exhausted, and workmen attended belom. When experiments were to be perſormed in the receiver E, it was set on the top of the great vessel, and the cock H was opened. The air in X immediately diſfused itself equally between the two vessels, and was so much more rareſied as the receiver  was smaller than the vessel G. When this rareſaction was not suſficient, the attendants below immediately worked the pump. These particulars deserve to be recorded, as they show the inventive genius oſ this celebrated philosopher, and because they are useful even in the present advanced state of the study. Guericke's method of excluding air from all the joints of his apparatus, by immersing these joints in water, is the only method that has to this day been found effeetual; and there frequently occur experiments where this exclusion for a long time is absolutely necessary. In such eases it is necessary to construct little cups or cisterns at every joint,and to fill them with water or oil. In a letter to Schottus, 1662-3, he describes very ingenious contrivances for producing complete rarefaction aſter the elasticity oſ the remaining air has been so far diminished that i is not able to open the valves. Hẽ opens the exhaustinꝶ valves by a plug, which is pushed n hy the hand'; and the discharging valve is opened by a small pump placed on ĩts ontside, so that it opens into a void imstead of opening against the presure of the atmosphere. (8eæ 8ehotti Technica Curiosa, p. 68, 70.) These contrivances have hèen lately addedũ to air-pumps by Haas and Hurter o5 new inventions. It must be acknowledged, that the application of the pump or syringe to the exhaustion of air was a very obvious thought on the principle exhibited in No 1V; und' in this way it was also employed by Guẽrieke, who first filled the receiver with water, and then applied the syringe. But this was by no means either his object or his principle. Eis object was not solely to procure a véssel void oſ ũir, but to exhaust the ai? which was alrendy init; and hũs principle was the power which he suspected to be in air of expanding itself into a greater space when the foree vas removed which he supposed to compress it. He expresly says (Tract. de Experimentis Magdeburgicis, et in Epist. ad Schotum), that the eontrivance oceurred to him aceidentally when occupied with experiments on the Torieellian tube, in which he found that the air would really expand, and completely fill a much larger space than what it usu⸗lly occupied, and that he had found no limits to the expansion, evincing this by facts which we shall perfectly unũerstand by and by. This was a doetrine quite new, ãũd required a philosophical mind to view it in a general and sys tematic manner; and it must be owned that his manner of treating the subject is equally remarkable for ingenuity and for modesty. (Epist. ad Sehottum.) His doctrine and his machine were soon spread over Europe. It was the age of literury ardour and philosophical curiosity; and it is most pleasing to us, who, standing on the shoulders oſ our predecessors, ean see far around us, to observe the eagerness with which every new, and to us frivolous, experiment was repeated and canvassed. The worshippers oſ Aristotle were daily receiving severe mortfications from the experimenters, or empirics, as they affecæd to call them, and they exerted themselves strenuously in support oſ his now tottering cause. This conrbuted to the rapid propagation of every discovery; and it was a most profitable and respectable business to go through the chieſ cities of Germany and France exhibiting philosophical experiments. About this time the foundations of the Royal Society of London were laid. Mr Boyle, Mr Wren, Lord Brounker, Dr Wallis, and other curious gentlemen, held meetings at Oxſord, in which were received accounts of whatever was doing in the study of nature; and many experimenis were exhibitedl. The researches oſ Galileo, Toricelli, and Paschal, concerning the pressure of the air, greatly engaged their attention, and many additions were made to their discoveries Mr Boyle, the most ardent and successſul studier of nature, had the principal share in these improvements, his inquisitive mind being aided by an opulent fortune. In a letter o his nephew, Lord Dungarvon, he says that he had made many attempts to see the appearances exhibited by bodies ſreed from the pressure oſ the air. He had made Toricellian tubes, having a small vessel a-top, into which he put some bodies before filling the tubes vith mercury; so that vhen the tube was set upright, and the mercury run out, the bodies were in vacuo. He had alo abstracted the water from a vessel, by a small pump, by means of its weight, in the manner described in No Iĩ, having previously put bodies into the vessel along with the water. But all these ways were very troublesome and inperfect. He was delighted when he learned ſrom Schottuss first publication, that Counsellor Guericke had effected this by the expansive power of the air; and immediately st about construeting a machine from his own ideas, no description oſ Guerickes being then published. It consisted oſ a receiver A (Fig. 18.), furnished vith a stopcock B, and syringe CD placed in a vertical position below the receiver. Its valve C was in its bottom, close adjoining to the entry of the pipe of communication; and the hole by which the air issued was ſarther secured by a plug which could be removed. The piston was moved by a wheel and rackwork. The receiver of Guericke's pump was but ill adapted for any considerable variety of experiments; and accordingly very few were made in it. Mr Boyle's receiver had a large opening EF, vith a strong glass marginn. To this was fitted a strong brass cap, pierced with a hole G in its middle, to which was fitted a plug ground into it, and shaped like the key of a cock. The extremity of this key was furnished with a screw, to which could be affixed a hook, or a variety of pieces for supporting what was to be èxamined in the receiver, or for producing various motions within it, without admitting the air. This was farther guarded against by means of oil poured round the key, where it was retained by the hollow cup-like form of the cover. With all these precautions, however, Mr Boyle ingeniously confesses, that it was but seldom, and vwith great difficulty, that he could produce an extreme degree oſ rareſaction; and it appears by Guericke's letter to Schottus, that in this respect the Magdeburgh machine had the advantage But most of Boyles very interesting experiments did not require this extreme rarefaction; and the variety of them, and their philosophic importance, compensated for this defect, and soon eclipsed the fame of the inventor to such a degree, that the state of air in the receiver, was generally denominated the vacuum Boyleanum, and the air- pump was called machina Boyleana. It does not appear that Guericke was at all solicitous to maintain his claim to priority or invention. He appears to have been of a truly noble and philosophical mind, aiming at nothing but the advancement oſ science. Mr Boyle found, that to make a vessel air-tight, it was suſficient to place a piece of wet or oiled leather on its brim, and io lay a flat plate of metal upon thiss The pressure o the extenal air squeczed the two solid bodies s hard together, that the soſt leather effectually excluded it This enabled him to render the whole machine ineomparably more convenient ſor a variety oſf experiments. He caused the conduit-pipe to terminate in a flat plate which he covered vith leather, and on this he set the glass hall or receiver, vhich had both its upper and lower brim ground flatt He covered the upper oriſicæ in like manner with a piece of oiled leather and a ſlat plate, having cocks and a variety oſ other perforations and contrivances suited to his purposes. This he found inſinitely more expeditious, and also lighter, than the clammy cements vhich he had formerly usd ſor securing the joiuts. He vas now assisted by Dr Hooke, the most ingenious and inventive mechanic that the world has ever seen. This person made a great improvement on the air-pump, by applying two syringes whose piston-rods were vorked by the same wheel, as in Fig. 20, and putting valves in the pistons in the same manner as in the piston of a common pump. This evidently doubled the expedition oſ the pump's operation: but it also greatly diminished the labour of pumping; for it must be observed, that the piston H must be drawn up against the pressure oſf the external air, and when the rarefaction is nearly perfeet, this requires a force of nearly 15 pounds for every inch of the area of the piston. Now when one piston H is at the bottom of the barrel, the other X is at the top of the barrel, and the arr below K is equally rare with that in the receiver. There fore the pressure of the external air on the piston Kis nearly equal to that on the piston H. Both, therefore, ar acting in opposite directions on the wheel which gave them motion; and the force necessary for raising H is only ithe difference between the elasticity of the air in the barrel H and that of the air in the barrel E This is very small in the beginning oſ the stroke, but gradually increases as the piston X descends, and becomes equal ſo the whole excess of the airs pressure above the elasticity of the remaining air of the receiver when the air at  of the natural density begins to open the piston valves. An accurate attention to the cireumstances will show us that the force requisite for working the pump is greatest at first, and gradually diminishes as the rareſaction advances; and vhen this iĩs. nearly complete, hardly any more force ĩs required than what is necessary for overcoming the ſriction of the pistons, except during the discharge of the air at the end of each stroke. This is therefore the ſorm of the air-pump which ĩis most generally used all over Europe. Some traces oſ national prepossession remain. In Germany, air-pumps are frequently made after the original model of Guericke's (Wolſf Cyclomathesis); and the French generally use the pump made by Papin, though extremely avkward. We shall give a description of Boyle's air-pump as finally improved by Hawkesbee, which, with some small accommodations to particular views, still remains the most approved form. Here follos the description ſfrom Desaguliers: It consists of two brass barrels a a, a a (fig. I9.), 12 inches high and 2 wide. The pistons are raised and depressed by turning the winch b b. This is fastened to an axis passing through a strong-toothed wheel, which lays hold of the teeth of the racks e ccc. Then the one is raised vhile the other is depressed; by which means the valves, which are made of limber bladder, fixed in the upper part of each piston, as well as in the openings into the bottom of the barrels; perform their oſfice of discharging the air from the barrels, and admitting into them the air from the receiver to be afterwards discharged; and vhen the receiver comes to be pretty well exhausted of its air, the pressure of the atmosphere in the descending piston is nearly so great, that the power required to raise the other is little more than is necessary for overcoming the frietion of the piston, which renders this pump preſerable to all others, which require more force to work them as the rarefaction oſ the air in the receiver advances. The barrels are set in a brass dish about two inches deep, filled with water or oll to prevent the insinuation oſ ar. The barrels are screwed tight down by the nuts æę, ee, which force the frontispiece .f down on them, through which the two pillars , && pass. From between the barrels rises a slender brass pipe h à, communicating with each by a perforation in the transvers piece of brass on which they stand. The upper end oſ this pipe communieates with another perſorated piece of brass, which serews on underneath the plate ĩ ĩ ĩ i, of ten inches diameter, and surrounded vith a brass rim to prevent the shedding of water used in some experiments. This piece of brass has three branches: I. An horizontal one communicating with the conduit-pipe hhl. 2 An upright one screwed into the middle of the pump-plate, and terminating in a small pipe , rising about an inch above itt S. Is a perpendicular one, looking downwards in the continuation of the pipe , and having a hollow serew in iĩts end receiving the brass cap oſ the gage-pipe II11I, which is oſ glass, 34 inches long, and immersed in a glass cistern m m filled vith mereury. This is covered a-top with a cork float, carrying the weight of a light wooden scale divided ino inches, which are numbered from the surface oſ the mercury in the cistern. This scale will thereſore rise and ſl with the mercury in the cistern, and indicate the true elevation of that in the tube. There is a stopcock immediately above the insertion oſ the gage-pipe, by which its communication may be cut ofſ. There is another at n, by which a communication is opened vith the external air for allowing its readmission; and there is sometimes another immediately within the insertion of the conduct-pipe for cutting oſf the communication bet ween the receiver and the pump. This is particularly useful when the rareſaction is to be continued long, as there are by these means ſever chances of the insinuation of air by the many joints. The receivers are made tight by simply setting them on the pumpplate with a piece of wet or oiled leather between; and the receivers, which are open a- top, have a brass cover set on them in the same manner. In these covers there are various perforations and contrivances for various purposess. The one in the figure has a slip wire passing through a collar of oiled leather, having a hook or a screw in its lower end for hanging any thing on or producing a variety of motions. Sometimes the receivers are set on another plate, which has a pipe sereed into its middle, furnished with a stopcock and a serew, which ſits the middle pipe . When the rareſaction has been made in it, the cock is shut, and then the whole may be unserewed from the pump, and removed to any convenient place This is called a ſransporter plate. It only remains to explain the gage IIIl. In the ordinary state oſ the air its elasticity balances the pressure oſ the incumbent atmospheree We find this ſrom the foree that is necessary to squeeze it into less bulk in opposition to this elasticity. Thereſore the elasticity oſ the air increases with the vicinity of its particles It is thereſore reasonable to expect, that when we allow it to oceupy more room, and its particles are farther asunder, its elasticity vill be diminished though not annihilated; that is, it will no longer balance the vHOLE pressure of the atmosphere, though it may still balance part of it. If thereſore an upright pipe have its lower end immersed in a vessel of mercury, and communicate by its upper end vith a vessel containing rarefied, therefore less elastic, air, ve should expect that the pressure of the air will prevail, and force the mercury into the tube, and cause it to rise to such an height that the weight of the mercury, joined to the elasticity of 6 the rarefied air acting on its upper surface, shall be exacily equal to the whole pressure of the atmosphere. The height oſ the mercury is the exact measure of that part oſ the whole pressure which is not balanced by the elasticity of the rarefied air, and its deficiency from the height of the mercury in the Toricellian tube is the exact measure oſ this remuining elasticity. It is evident thereſore, that the pipe will be a seale of the elasticity of the remaining air, and will indieate in some sort the degree of rareſaction: for there must be some analogy between the density of the air and its elasticity; and we have no reason to imagine that they do not increase and diminish together, although ve may be ignorant oſ the law, that is, of the change of elasticity corresponding o a known change oſ density. This is to be discovered by experiment; and the air-pump itselſ furnishes us with the best experiments for this purpose. Aſter rarefying till the mereury in the gage has attained half the height of that in the Toricellian tube, shut the communication with the barrels and gage, and admit the vater into the receiver. It vill go in till all is again in equilibrio with the pressure of the atmosphere; that is, till the air in the receiver has collapsed into its natural bulk. This we can accurately measure, and compare vith the whole capacity oſ the recẽiver; and thus obtain the precise degree of rarefaction corresponding to half the natural elasticity. We can do the same thing with the elasticity reduced to one-third, one-fourth, &e. and thus discover the whole law. This gage must be considered as one of the most ingenious and convenient parts of Hawkesbee's pump; and it is well disposed, being in a situation protected against accidents; but it necessarily inereases greatly the size oſ the machine, and cannot be applied to the table-pump, represented in Fig. 20, No. . When it is wanted here, a small plate is added behind, or between the barrels and receiver; and on this is set a small tubulated (as it is termed) ren ceiver, covering a common weather-glass tube. This receiver heing rareſied along with the other, the pressure on the mercury in the cistern, arising from the elasticity of the remaining air, is diminished so as to be no longer able to support the mercury at its full height; and it therefore descends till the height at which it stands puts it in equilibrio vith the elasticity. In this form, thereſore, the height of the mereury is directly a measure oſ the remaining elasticity; while in the other it measures the remaining unbalanced pressure of the atmospheree But this gage is extremely cumbersome and liable to accidentss We are seldom much interested in the rareſaction till it is great: a contracted form of this gage is therefore very useſul, and vas early usedlc A syphon ABCD (Fig. 2l.) each branch of which is about four inches long, and close at A and open at D, is filled with boiling mercury till it oceupies the branch AB and a very small part of CD, having its surſace at O. This is fixed to a small stand, and fixed into the receiver, along vith the things that are to be exhibited in the rareſied air When the air has been rarefied till its remaining elasticity is not able to support the column BA, the mercury descends in AB, and rises in CD, and the remaining elasticity will always be measured by the elevation of the mercury in AB above that in the leg CD. Could the exhaustion be perfected, the surfaces in both legs would be on a level. Another gage might be put into the same foot, having a small bubble of air at A. This would move from the beginning of the rareſaction; but our ignorance of the analogy between the density and elasticity hinders us from using it as a measure of either. It is enough for our present purpose to observe, that the barometer or syphon gage is a perfect indication and measure of the performance of an air-pump, and that a pump is (cæteris paribus) so much the more perfect, as it is able to raise the mercury higher in the gage. It is in this way that we diseover that none can produce a complete Vou. III. 20 exhaustion, and that their operation is onlya very great rareſaction; for none can raise the mercury to that height æ which it stands in the Toricellian tube, well purged of air. Few pumps vill bring it within ſ45 of an inch. Havkesbeæs, fitted up according to his instructions, will seldom bring ĩt vithin 3. Pumps with cocks, when constructed accordmg to the principles mentioned when speaking of the exhausting syringe, and new and in fine order, will in favourable circumstances bring it within 45. None with valves, fitted up vith wet leather, or when water or volatile ſluids are allowed access into any part, will bring it nearer than ĩ. Nay, a pump of the best kind, and in the finest order, will have its rareſying power reduced to the lowest standard, as measured by this gage, if we put into the receiver the tenth part of a square inch of white sheep-skin, fresh from the shops, or of any substance equally damp. This is a diseovery made by means of the improved air-pump, and leads to very extensive and important consequences in general physies; some of which will be treated of under this article: and the observation is made thus early, that our readers may better understand the improvements which have been made on this celebrated machine. It would require a volume to describe all the changes which have been made on itt. An instrument of such multiſarious use, and in the hands of curious men, each diving into the secrets of nature in his ſavourite line, must have received many alterations and real improvements in many particular respectss. But these are beside our present purpose; which is to consider it merely as a machine for rare fying elastic or expansive fluidss We must therefore confine ourselves to this view oſ it; and shall carefully state to our readers every improvement founded on principle, and on pneumatical lavs. All who used it perceived the limit set to the rareſaction by the resistance oſ the valves, and tried to perſect the construetion of the cocks The Abbẽ Nollet and Grave- sande, two of the most eminent experimental philosophers in Europe, were the most successſul. Mr Gravesande justly preferred Hooke's plan of a double pump, and contrived an apparatus ſor turning the cocks by the motion of the pumps handle This is far from either being simple or easy in working; and occasions great jerks and concussions in the whole machine. This, however, is not necessarily connected with the truly pneumatical improvement. Hiĩs piston has no valve, and the rod is connected vith it by a stirrup D Fig. 22.), as in a common pump. The rod has a cylindrie part, c ꝓ, which passes through the stirrup, and has a stiſf motion in it up and dovn of about halſ an inch; being stopped by the shoulder c above and the nut below. The round plate supported by this stirrup has a short square tube n d, which fits tight into the hole of a piece of cork F. The round plate E has a square shank , which goes into the square tube n . A piece of thin leather 7, soaked in oil, is put between the cork and the plate E, and another between the cork and the plate which forms the sole of the stirrup. All those pieces are screwed together by the nail e, whose flat head covers the hole n. Suppose, therefore, the piston touching the bottom of the barrel, and the winch turning to raise it again, the ſriction of the piston on the barrel keeps it in its place, and the rod is drawn up through the stirrup D. Thus the wheel has liberty to turn about an inch; and this is suſfficient for turning the cock, so as to cut off the communication with the external air, and to open the communication with the receiver. This being done, and the motion of the winch continued, the piston is raised to the top oſ the barre. When the winch is turned in the opposite direction, the piston remains fixed till the cock is turned, s as to shut the communication with the receiver, and open that with the external air. This is a pretty contrivance, and does not at first appear necessary; because the cocks might be made to turn at the beginning and end of the stroke vwithout itt. But this is just possible; and the smallest error oſ adjustment, or wearing of the apparatus, vill cause them to be open at improper times. Besides, the cocks are not turned in an instant, and are improperly open during some very small time; but this contrivance completely obviates this difficulty. The cock is precisely similar to that formerly deseribed, having one perforation diametrically through it, and another entering at right angles to this, and after reaching the centre, it passes along the axis of the cock, and comes out to the open air. It is evident, that by this construction of the cck, the ingenious improvement of Dr Hooke, by which the pressure oſ the atmosphere on one piston is made to halanc] (in great part) the pressure on the other, is given up: for, vwhenever the communication with the air is opened, it rushes in, and immediately balances the pressure on the upper side of the piston in this barrel; so that the whole pressure in the other must be overcome by the person working the pump. Gravesande, aware oſ this, put a valve on the orifice of the cock; that is, tied a slp of wet bladder or oiled leather across it; and now the piston is pressed down, as long as the air in the barrel is rarer than the outward air, in the same manner as when the valve is in the piston itself. This is all that is necessary to be described in Mr Gravesande's air-pump. Its performance is highly extolled by him, as far exceeding his former pumps with valves. The same preſerence was given to it by his successor Muschenbroek. But, while they hoth prepared the pistons and valves and leathers of the pump, by steeping them in oil, and then in a mixture oſ water and spirits of wine, we ar certain that no just estimate could be made of its performance. For with this preparation it could not bring the gage within  of an inch of the barometerr. We even sæ other limits to its rareſaction: from its construetion, iĩt is plain that a very considerable space is leſt between the piston and cock, not less than an inch, from which the air is never expelled; and if this be made extremely small, it is plain that the pump must be worked very slow, otherwise there vill not be time for the air to diffuse itselſ ſfrom the receiver into the barrel, especially towards the end, when the expelling force, viæ. the elasticity of the remaining air is very small. There is also the same limit to the rareſaction, as in Hooke's or Hawkesbee's pump, opposed by the valve E, which will not open till the air below the piston is considerably denser than the external air: and this Pump soon lost any advantages it possessed when fresh from the workman's hands, by the cocks growing loose and admitting air. It is surprising that Gravesande omitted Hawkesbee's security against this, by placing the barrels in a dish ſilled with oil; which would effectually have prevented this inconvenience. We must not omit a seemingly paradoxical observation oſ Gravesande, that in a pump constructed with valves, and worked vith a determined uniform velocity, the required degree oſ rareſaction is sooner produced by short barrels than by long ones. It would require too much time to give a general demonstration oſ this, but it will easily be seen by an example. Suppose the long barrel to have equal capacity with the receiver, then at the end of the first stroke the air in the receiver will have j its natural density. Now, let the short barrels have half this eapacity; at the end of the first stroke the density of the air in the receiver is j, and at the end of the second stroke it is ꝗ, which ĩs less than 4, and the two strokes of the short barrel are supposed to be made in the same time vith one of the longest, &e. Havkesbee's pump maintained its pre-eminence without rival in Britain, and generally too on the continent, except in France, where every thing took the ſon of the Academy, which abhorred being indebted to foreigners ſor any thing m in science, till about the year 1750, when it engared the attention of Mr John Smeaton, a person of uncommon knovledge, and second to none but Dr Hooke n sagacity and mechanical resourc. He was then a maker oſ philosophical instruments, and made many attempts to perſect the pumps vith cocks, but found, that whatever perſection he could bring them to, he could not enable them to pr serve it; and he never would sell one of this construetion He thereſore attached himself solely to the valve pumps The first thing was to diminish the resistance to the entry of the air from the receiver into the barrels: this he rendered almost nothing, by enlarging the surface on which this feeble elastic air vas to presss Instead oſ making these valves to open by its pressure on a circle of ; oſ an inch in diameter, he made the valve-hole one inch in diame ter, enlarging the surſace 400 times; and to prevent this piece of thin leather from being burst by the great pressure on it, when the piston in its descent wvas approaching the bottom of the barrel, he supported it by a delicate but strong grating, dividing the valve- hole like the section of a honey- comb, as represented in Fig. 25; and the ribs of this grating are seen edgevise in Fig. 23, at a b c. The valve was a piece of thin membrane or oiled silk, gently strained over the mouth of the valve-hole, and tied on by a fine silk thread wound round it in the same mauner that the narrow slips had been tied on formerly. This done, he cut ith a pointed knife the leather round the edge, nearly four quadrantal arcs, leaving a small tongue between each, as in Fig. 25. The strained valve immediately shrinks inwards, as represented by the shaded parts; and the strain by which it is kept down is no& greatly diminished, taking place only at the cornerss The gratings being reduced nearly to an edge (but not quite, lest they should cut), there is very little pressure to produœ adhesion by the clammy oil. Thus it appears, that a very small elasticity oſ the air in the receiver will be suſficient to raise the valve; and Mr Smeaton found, that when it vas not able to do this at first, vhen only about ⸗345 oſ the natural elasticity, it would do it after keeping the piston up æight or ten seconds, the air having been all the while undermining the valve, and gradually detaching it from the grating. Unſortunately he could not follow this method with the piston valvee. There was not room round the rod for such an expanded valve; and it would have obliged him to have a great space below the valve, from which he could not expel the air by the descent of the piston. His ingenuity hit on a way of increasing the expelling force through the common valve: he enclosed the rod of the piston in a collar of leather I, through which it moved freely without allowing any air to get past its sidess. For greater security, the collar of leather was contained in a box terminating in a cup filled with oil. As this makes a material change in the principle of construetion of the air-pump (and indeed of pneumatic engines in general), and as it har been adopted in all the subsequent attempts to improve them, it merits a particular consideration. The piston itself consists of two pieces oſ brass fastened by screws from belov. The uppermost, which is of one solid piece with the rod GH (Fig. 28.), is of a diameter somewhat less than the barrel; so that when they are screwed together, a piece of leather, soaked in a mixture of hoiled oil and tallow, is put between them; and vhen the piston is thrust into the barrel from above, the leather comes up around the side of the piston, and fills the barrel, making the piston perfectly air-tightt. The lower half of the piston projects upwards into the upper, vhich has a hollow gb c g to receive it. There is a small hole through the lower half at a to admit the air; and a hole c d in the upper halſ to let it through, and there is a slip of oiled silk strained across the hole u by way of valve, and there is room enough leſt at b c for this valve to rise a little when pressed ſfrom belo. The rod GH passes through the piece of brass which forms the top of the barrel 50 as to move freely, but without any sensible shake: this top is formed into a hollow box, consisting of two pieces ECDF and CNOD, which screw together at CD. This box is filled with rings of oiled leather exactly fitted to its diameter, each having a hole in it for the rod to pas through. When the piece ECDF is screwed down, ĩt compresses the leathers; squeezing them to the rod,  that no air can pass between them; and, to secure us against all ingress oſ air, the upper part is ſormed into a cup EF, which is kept filled with oil. The top of the barrel is also pierced with a hole LE, which rises above the flat surface NO, and has a slip of oiled silk tied over it to act as a valve; opening when pressed from below, but shutting when pressed from above. The communication between the barrel and receiver is made by means of the pipe ABPQ; and there goes ſrom the hole  in the top of the barrel a pipe KRST, which either communicates with the open air or with the receiver, by means of the cock at its extremity T. The conduit pipe ABPQ has also a cock at Q, by which it is made to communicate either with the receiver or with the open air. These channels oſf communication are variously condueted and terminated, according to the views of the maker: the sketch in this figure is suſficient for explaining the princple, and is suited to the general form of the pump, as it has been ſrequently made by Nairne and other artists in London. Let us now suppose the piston at the top of the barrel, and that it applies to ĩt all over, and that the air in the barrel is very much rarefied: in the common pump the piston valve is pressed hard down by the atmosphere, and eontinues shut till the piston gets far down, conden: the air below it beyond its natural state, and enables it to force up the valves. But here, as soon as the piston quits the top of the harrel, it leaves a void behind it; for no air gets in round the piston rod, and the valve at X is shut by the pressure of the atmospheree. There is nothing now to oppose the elasticity of the air below but the stiſſness of the valve b c; and thus the expelling (or more accurately the liberating) force is prodigiously increased. The superiority of this construetion will be best seen by an examplee Suppose the stiſſness of the valve equal to the veight of 45 of an inch of mercury, when the barometer stands at 30 inches, and that the pump gage stands at 20.9; then, in an ordinary pump, the valve in the piston will not rise till the piston has got within the 300th part of the bottom of the barrel, and it will leave the valve- hole filled with air of the ordinary density. But in this pump the valve vill rise as soon as the piston quits the top of the barrel; and when it is quite down, the valve-hole a vill contain only the 300th part of the air which it would have contained in a pump oſ the ordinary form. Suppose further, that the barrel is of equal capacity with the receiver, and that both pumps are so badly construeted, that the space leſt below the piston is the 300th part of the barrel. In the common pump the piston valve vill rise no more, and the rarefaction can be earried no farther, however delicate the barrel valve may be; but in this pump the next stroke vill raise the gage to 29.95, and the piston valve vill again rise as soon as the piston gets half way down the barrel. The limit to the rareſaction by this pump depends chiefly on the space contained in the hole LX; and in the space b c d of the pistonn When the piston is brought up to the top, and applied close to it, those spaces remain filled with the air of the ordinary density, which vill expand as the piston descends, and thus will retard the opening of the piston valvee. The rareſaction vill stop when the elasticity of this small quantity of air, expanded to fill the whole barrel (by the descent of the piston to the bottom), is just equal to the force requisite for opening the piston valve. Another advantage attending this construction is, that in drawing up the piston, we are not resisted by the whole pressure of the air; because the air is rarefied above this piston as well as below it, and the piston is in preciseæly the same state of pressure as if connected with another piston in a double pump. The resistance to the ascent oſ the piston is the excess of the elasticity oſ the air above it over the elasticity of the air below: this, toward the end of the rareſaction, ĩs very small, while the piston is near the bottom of the barrel, but gradually increases as the ſiston rises, and reduces the air above it into smaller dimensions, and becomes equal to the pressure of the atmosphere, when the air above the piston is oſ the common density. Iſ we should raise the piston still farther, ve must condense the air above it: but Mr Smeaton has here made an issue for the air by a small hole in the top of the barrel, covered vith a delicate valve. This allows the air to escape, and shuts again as soon as the piston begins to descend. ſumving almost a perſect void behind it as before. This pump has another advantage. It may be changed in a moment from a rarefying to a condensing engine, by simply turning the cocks at Q and T. While T communicates with the open air and Q with the receiver, it is a rareſying engine or air- pump: but when T communicates vith the receiver, and Q vith the open air, it is a condensing engine. Fig. 6. represents Mr Smeaton's air-pump as it is usually made by Nairne. Upon a solid base or table am set up three pillars F, H, H: the pillar F supports the pump-plate A; and the pillars H, H, support the front or head, containing a brass cog-wheel, which is turned by the handle B, and works in the rack C fastened to the upper ænd of the piston rod. The whole is still ſarther steadied by two pieces of brass c b and o æ, which conneet the pumpplate with the front, and have perforations communicating between the hole a in the middle of the plate and the barrel, as will be described immediately DE is the barrel of the pump, firmly fixed to the table by screws through ĩts upper ſlanch: ęfdc is a slender brass tube screwed to the bottom of the barrel, and to the under hole of the horizontal canal c b. In this canal there is a cock which opens a communication between the barrel and the receiver, vhen the key is in the position represented here: but when the key is at right angles with this position, this communication is cut off. If that side of the key which is here dravn next to the pump-plate be turned outward, the external air is admitted into the receiver; but if turned inwards, the air is admitted into the barrel. g h is another slender brass-pipe, leading from the discharging valve at g to the horizontal canal h k, to the under side oſ which it is screwed fast. In this horizontal canal there is a cock n which opens a passage from the barrel to the receiver when the key is in the position here drawn; but opens a passage from the barrel to the external air vhen the key is turned outwards, and from the receiver to the external air when the key is turned inwards. This communication with the external air is not immediate, but through a sort of box ĩ; the use of this box is to receive the oil which is discharged through the top valve . In order to keep the pump tight, and in working order, it is proper sometimes to pour a table-spoonful of olive-cil into the hole a oſ the pump-plate, and then to work the pump. The oil goes along the conduit b c d fe, gets into the barrel and through the piston-valve, when the piston is pressed to the bottom of the barrel, and is then drawn up, and forced through the discharging valve  along the pipe h, the horizontal passage h n, and finally into the box i. This box has a small hole in its side near the top, through which the air escapes. From the upper side of the canal c b there rises a slender pipe which bends outward and then turns downvards, and is joined to a small box, which cannot be seen in this view. From the bottom of this box proceeds downwards the gage-pipe oſ glass, which enters the cistern of mercury G fixed below. On the upper side of the other canal at o is seen a small stud, having a short pipe of glass projecting horizontally from it, close by and parallel to the front piece of the pump, and reaching to the other canal. This pipe is close at the farther end, and has a small drop of mercury or oil in at the end o. This serves as a gage in condensing, indicating the degree of condensation by the place of the drop: for this drop is foreed along the pipe, condening the air before it in the same degree that it is condensed in the barrel and recciver. In constructing this pump, Mr Smeaton introduced a method of joining together the different pipes and other pieces, which has great advantages over the usual manner of serewing them together with leather bet ween, and which is now much used in hydraulic and pneumatic enginess We shall explain this to our readers by a description oſ the manner in which the exhausting gage is joined to the horizontal duet cb. The piece h i p, in Fig. 24. is the same with the litile cylinder observable on the upper side oſ the horizontal canal c d, in Fig. 26. The upper part h i is formed into an outside screw, to fit the hollow screw of the piece de e d. The top of this last piece has a hole in its middle, giving an easy passage to the bent tube c b a, so as to slip along it with freedom. To the end c of this bent tube is soldered a piece of brass  fę, perforated in continuation of the tube, and having its end ground ſlat on the top of the piece h i p, and also covered with a slip of thin leather strained across it and pierced with a hole in the middle. It is plain from this form, that if the surſace ſę be ap- plied to the top of hi, and the cover d e e d be screwed down on it, it ill draw or press them together, so that no nir ean escape by the joint, and this without turning the whole tube c b a round, as is necessary in the usual way. This method is now adopted for joining together the conducting pipes of the machines for extinguishing fires,an operation which was extremely troublesome before this improvement. The conduit pipe E  fc (Fig. 26.) is fastened to the bottom of the barrel, and the discharging pipe Zh to its top, in the same manner. But to return to the gage: the bent pipe c b a enters the box ⸗ ? near one side, and obliquely, and the gage-pipe ꝗ r is inserted through its bottom towards the opposite sidee The use of this hox is to catch any drops of mereury which may sometimes be dashed up through the gage pipe by an accidental oscillation. This, by going through the passages of the pump, would corrode them, and would act particularly on the joints, which are generally soldered with ti. When this happens to an air-pump, it must be cleaned with the most scrupulous attention, otherwise it will be quickly destroyed. This account of Smeatons pump is suſficient for enabling the reader to understand its operation and to see its superiority. It is reckoned a very fine pump of the ordinary construction, which will rarefy 200 times, or raise the gage to 29.85, the barometer standing at 30. But Mr Smeaton found, that his pump, even aſter long using, raised it to 20.95, which we consider as equivalent to rarefying 600 timess. When in fine order, he found no bounds to its rarefaction, ſrequently raising the gage as high as the barometer; and he thought its performance so perfect, that the barometer-gage was not sufficiently delicate for measuring the rarefaction He therefore substituted the syphon-gage already described, which he gives some reasons for preſerring; but even this he found not sufficiently sensible. He contrived another, which could be carried to any degree of sensibility. It consisted of a glass body A (Fig. 2.), of a pear shape, and was therefore called the peargage. This had a small projecting oriſicæ at B, and at the other end a tube CD, whose capacity was the hundredth purt of the capacity of the whole vessel. This was suspended at the slip- wire oſ the receiver, and there was set below it a small cup with mercury. When the pump va worked, the air in the pear-gage was rarefied along with the rest When the rareſaction was brought to the degree intended, the gage was let down till B reached the bottom of the mercury. The external air being nov let in, the mercury was raised into the pear, and stood at some height E in the tube CD. The length of this tube being divided into 100 parts, and those numbered from D, iĩt is evident that b vill express the degree of rarefaction which had been produced when the gage was immersed into the mereury; or if DC be ſ3, oſ the whole capacity, and be divided into I00 parts by a scale annexed to it, each unit of the scale will be ;5555 of the whole. This was a very ingenious contrivance, and has heen the means of making some very curious and important diseoveries which at present engage the attention of philosophers By this gage Mr Smeaton found, that his pump frequently rarefied a thousand, ten thousand, nay an hundred thousand times. But though he in every instance saw the great superiority of his pump above all others, he frequently found irregularities which he could not explain, and a want of correspondence between the pear and the barometer gages which puzzled him. The pear-gage frequently indicated a prodigious rarefaction, hen the barometer-gage would not shew more than 600. These unaccountable phenomena excited the curiosity of philosophers, who by this time were making continual use of the air-pump in their meteorological researches, and 6 much interested in every thing connected vith the state or constitution of elastic fluidss. Mr Nairne, a most ingenious |and accurate maker of philosophical instruments, made many curious experiments in the examination and comparison of Mr Smeaton's pump vwith those of the usual construction, attending to every circumstance which could contribute to the inferiority of the common pumps or to their improvement, so as to bring them nearer to this rival machinee. This rigorous comparison brought into view several circumstances in the constitution of the atmospherie air, and its relation to other bodies, which are of the most extensive and important influence in the operations of nature We shall notice at present such only as have a relation to the operation of the air-pump in extracting Ar from the receiver. Mr Nairne found, that when a little water, or even a hit of paper damped with water, was exposed under the receiver oſf Mr Smeatons air-pump, when in the most perfect condition, raising the mercury in the barometer- gage to 209.95, he could not make it rise above 29.8 if Fahrenheits thermometer indicated the temperature 470, nor above 29.7 if the thermometer stood at 56; and that to bring the gage to this height and keep it there, the operation of the pump must be continued ſor a long time aſter the vater had disappeared, or the paper become perſectly dry. He found that a drop of spirits, or paper moistened with spirits, could not in those circumstances allow the mereury in the gage to rise to near that height; and that similar effects followed from admitting any volatile body whatever into the receiver or any part of the apparatus. This showed him at once how improper the directions were which had been given by Gueriche, Boyle, Gravesande, and others, for fitting up the air-pump for experiment, by soaking the leather in water, covering the joints vith water, or, in short, admitting water or any other volatile body near it. He thereſore took his pumps to pieces, cleared them of all the moisture which he could drive from them by heat, and then leathered them anew with leather saked in a mixture of olive-il and tallow, from which he had expelled all the water it usually contains, by boiling it ſill the first ſrothing was over. When the pumps were ſitted up in this manner, he uniſormly found that Mr Smeatons pump rarefied the gage to 29.95, and the best commo pump to 29.87, the first of which he computed to indieate a rarefaction to 600, and the other to 230. But in this state he again ſound that a piec of damp paper, leather, wood, &e. in the receiver, reduced the performanc in the same manner as beſore. But the most remarkable phenomenon was, that when he made use of the pear-gage with the pump cleared ſrom all moisture, it indicated the same degree of rareſaction with the barometer-gage: but when he exposed a hit oſ paper moistened with spirits, and thus reduced the rarefaction of the pump to what he called 50, the barometer-gage standing at 2.4, the pear-gage indicated a rareſaction exceeding 100,000; in short, it was not measurable; and this phenomenon vas almost constant. Whenever he exposed any substance susceptible of evaporation, he found the rareſaction indieated by the barometer-gage greatly reduced, while that indicated by the pear-gage was prodigiously increasd: and hoth these effects were more remarkable as the subject was of easier evaporation, or the temperament of the air of the chamber was wãrmer. This uniform result suggested the true cause. Water boils at the temperature 212, that is, it is then converted into a vapour which is permanently elastic while of that temperature, and its elasticity balances the pressure of the atmosphere. If this pressure be diminished by rarefying the air above it, a loer temperature vill now allow it to be converted into elastic vapour, and keep it in that state. Water will boil in the receiver of an air-pump at the tem- perament 96, or even under it. Philosophers did not think of examining the state oſ the vapour in temperatures lower than vhat produced ebullitionn. But it now appears, that in much lover heats than this the superficial water is converted into elastic vapour, which continues to exhale ſrom ĩt as long as the water lasts, and, supplying the place of |ir in the recèiver, exerts the same elasticity, and hinders the mercury from rising in the gage in the same manner as 50 much air oſ equal elasticity would have done. When Mr Nairne was exhibiting these experiments to the Honourable Henry Cavendish in I776, this gentleman informed him that it appeared from a series of experiments of his father, Lord Charles Cavendish, that when water is of the temperature 72ò, it is converted into vapour, under any pressure less than three-fourths of an inch oſ mercury, and at 41° it becomes vapour when the pressure is less than one-fourth of an inch: even mercury evaporates in this manner when all pressure is removed. A dewy appearance is frequently observed covering the inside of the tube of a barometer, where we usually suppose a vacuum. This dew, when viewed through a microscope, appears to be a set of detached globules oſ mercury, and upon inclining the tube so thatthe mercury may ascend along it, these globules will be all licked up, and the tube become clea. The dew which lined it was the vapour of the mercury condensed by the side of the tube; and iĩt is never observed but when one side is exposed to a stream of eold air from a vindow, &e. To return to the vapour in the air- pump receiver, it must be observed, that as long as the water continues t6 yield it, ve may continue to work the pump; and it will be coſitinually abstracted by the barrels, and discharged in the ſorm of vater, because it collapses as s00n as exposed to the external pressure. All this while the gage will not indicate any more rareſaction, because the thing immediately indicated by the harometer-gage is diminished elasticity, Vou. III. 2pP which does not happen heree When all the water which the temperature of the room can keep elastic has evaporated under a certain pressure, suppose 4 an inch oſ mercury, the gage standing at 29.5, the vapour which nov fſills the receiver expands, and by its diminished elasticity the gage rises, and now some more vater, vhich had been attached to bodies by chemical or corpuscular attraction, is detached, and a new supply continues to support the gage at a greater height; and this goes on continually till almosi all ha been abstracted: but there will remain some which no art can take away; for as it passes through the barmels, and gets between the piston and the top, it successively collapses into water during the ascent of the piston, and again expands into vapour when we push the piston down agin Whenever this happens there is an end of the rareſaction While this operation is going on, the air comes out along with the vapour; but we cannot say in what proportion. If it were always uniſormly mixed with the vapour, it would diminish rapidly; but this does not appear o be the case. There is a certain period oſ rarefaction in which a transient cloudiness is perceived in the receiver. This is vatery vapour formed at that degree of rareſaction, mingled with, but not dissolved in or united with, the ar, otherwise it would be transparentt. A similar cloud vill appear if damp air be admitted suddenly into an exhausted receĩer. The vapour, which formed an uniform transparent mass vith the air, is either suddenly expanded, and thus detached from the other ingredient, or is suddenly let by the air, vhich expands more than it dosss We canmt affirm with probability which of these is the case: different compositions of air, that is, air loaded with vapours from different substances, exhibit remarkable differences in this respect. But we see from this and other phenomena, which shall be mentioned in their proper places, that the air and vapour are not always intimately united; and therefore vill not always be drawn out together by the air pump. But let them be ever so conſusedly blended, we see that the air must come out along with the vapour, and its quantity remaining in the receiver must be prodigiously diminished by this association, probably much more than could be, had the receiver only contained pure air. Let us now consider hat must happen in the pear-gage. As the air and vapour are continually drawn off from the receiver, the air in the pear expands and goes off ith it. We shall suppose that the generated vapour hinders the gage from rising beyond 20.5. During the continued working of the pump, the air in the pear, whose elasticity is 0.5, slowly mixes with the vapour at the mouth of the pear, and the mixture even advances into its inside, so that if the pumping be long enough continued, what is in the pear is nearly of the same composition with what ĩs in the receiver, consisting perhaps of 20 parts oſ vapour, and one part of air, all of the elasticity of 0.5. When the pear is plunged into the mercury, and the external air allowed to get into the receiver, the mercury rises in the pear-gage, but or T00 of it filled with common air, the vapour having collapsed into an invisible atom of vater. Thus the pear-gage will indicate a rarefaction of 1200, while the barometer-gage only showed 60, that is, showed the elasticity oſ the included substance diminished 60 times. The conclusion to be drawn from these two measures (the one of the rareſaction of air, and the other of the diminution of elasticity) is, that the matter with which the receiver was filled, immediately before the re-admission of the air, consisted of one part of the incondensi1200 60 The only ohscure part of this account is what relates to the composition oſ the matter which filled the pear-gage before the admission of the mereury. It is not easy to see how the vapour of the receiver comes in by a narrow mouth while the air is coming out by the same passage. and leaves not ble air, and , or 20 parts of vatery vapour. Accordingly it requires a very long time to produce this extreme rarefaction in the pear-gage; and there are great irregularities in any two'succeeding experiments, as may he seen by looking at Mr Naime's account of them in the Philosophical Transactions, vol. LXVII. Some vapours ajpear to have mixed much more readily with the air than others; and there are some unaceountable cases where vitriolie acid and sulphureous bodies were included, in which the diminution of density indicated by the pear-gage was uniſormly less than the diminution of elasticity indicated by the barometer-gage. It is enough for us at present to have established, by unquestionable ſacts, this produetion of elastic vapour, and the necessity oſ attending to it, both in the construction of the air-pump and in drawing results from experiments exhibited in it. Mr Smeaton's pump, when in good order, and perfeetly free from all moisture, vill in dry weather rareſy air about 6OO times, raising the barometer-gage to within ; of an inch of a fin barometer. This was a performance s much superior to that of all others, and hy means of Mr Nairme's experiments opened so new a field of observation, that the air-pump once more became a capital instrument among the experimental philosopherss. The causes of its superiority were also so distinct, that artists were immediately excited to a farther improvement of the machine; so that this becomes a new epoch in its history. There is one imperfection which Mr Smeaton has not atempted to remove. The discharging valve is still opened against the pressure oſ the atmospheree An author of the Swedish academy adds a subsidiary pump to this valve, vhich exhausts the air from above it, and thus puts it in the situntion oſ the piston-valvee We do not find that this improvement has been adopted s0 as to become general. Indeed, the quantity of air which remains in the passage to this valve is so exceedingly little, that it does not seem to merit attentionn. Supposing the valve-hole à, 6 of an inch wide, and as deep (and it need not be more), it will not occupy more than ,5; part of a barrel twelve inches long and two inches vide. Mr Smeaton, by his ingenious construction, has greatly diminished, but has not annihilated, the obstrucetions to the passage oſ the air from the receiver into the barrel. His success encouraged farther attempts. One of the first and most ingenious was that of Proſessor Russel of the University of Edinburgh, who, about the year 1770, construeted a pump in which both cocks and valves were avoided. The piston is solid, as represented in Fig. 21. and its rod passes through a collar of leather on the top of the barrel. This collar is divided into three portions by two brass rings a, b, which leave a very small space round the pistonrod. The upper ring a communicates by means oſ a lateral perforation with the bent tube I, m, n, whieh enters the barrel at its middle n. The lower ring b communicates vith the bent tube c, d, vhich communicates with the horizontal passage d, e, going to the middle æ oſf the pump plate. By the way, however, it communieates also with a barometer-gage p o, standing in a cistern of mercury o, and covered with a glass tube close at the top. Beyond ę, on the opposite circumference of the receiver-plate, there is a cock or plug  communicating with the atmosphere. The piston-rod is closely embraced by the three eollars of leather; but, as already said, has a free space round it in the two brass rings To produce this pressure of the leathers to the rod, the brass rings which separate them are turned thinner on the inner side, so that their cross section along a diameter would be a taper wedge. In the side of the piston-rod are two cavities q r, t 5, about onetenth of an inch wide and deep, and of a length equal to the thickness of the two rings a, b, and the intermediate collar of leatherss These cavities are s0 placed on the piston-rod, that when the piston is applied to the bottom oſ the barrel, the cavity ? s in the upper end oſ the rod has its upper end opposite to the ring a, and its lower end opposite to the ring b, or to the mouth of the pipe c ũ. Therefore, if there be a void in the barrel, the air from the receiver will come from the pipe c d into the cavity in the piston-rod, and by it will get past the collar oſ leather between the rings, and thus will get into the small interstice between the rod and the upper ring, and then into the pipe I m n, and into the empty barre.. When the piston is drawn up, the solid rod immediately shuts up this passage, and the piston drives the air through the discharging valve . When it has reached the top of the harrel, and is closely applied to it, the cavity ꝗ 7 is in the situation in which t 5 formerly was, and the communication is again opened between the receiver and the empty barrel, and the air is again diſfused between them. Pushing down the piston expels the air by the lower discharging-pipe and valve  i; and thus the operation may be continued. This must be acknowledged to be a most simple and ingenious construction, and can neither be called a cck nor a valvec. It seems to oppose no obstrucetion whatever; and it has the superior advantage of rareſying both during the ascent and the descent oſ the piston, doubling the expedition of the perſormance, and the operator is not opposd by the pressure of the atmosphere, except towards the end of ench strokee The expedition, however, is not so great as one should expeet; ſor nothing is going on while the piston is in motion, and the operator must stop a while at the end of each stroke, that the air may have time to come through this long, narrow, and crooked passage, to ſill the barrel But the chieſ difſiculty which occurred in the execution arose from the clammy oil with which it was necessary to impregnate the collar of leatherss. These were always in a state of strong compression, that they might closely grasp the piston-rod, and prevent all passage oſ air during the motion of the pistonn. Whenever therefore the cavities in the piston-rod come into the situations necessary ſor con- necting the receiver and burrel, this oil is squeered into them; and choaks them up. Hence it always happened that it was some time after the stroke before the air could force its way round the piston-rod, carrying with it the clammy oil which choaked up the tube I m n; and when the rareſraction had proceeded a certain length, the diminished elasticity of the air was not able to make its vay through these obstructions. The death of the ingenious author put a stop to the improvements by which he hoped to remedy this defect, and ve have not heard that any other person has since attempted it. We have inserted it here, because its principle of construetion is not only very ingenious, but entirely different from all others, and may furnish very useſul hints to those who are much engaged in the construetion of pneumatic engines. In the 73d volume of the Philosophical Transactions, Mr Tiberius Cavallo has given the description of an airpump contrived and executed by Messrs Huas and Hurter, instrument-makers in London, where these artists have revived Guericke's method of opening the barrelvalve during the last strokes oſ the pump by a force acting from without. We shall insert so much of this description as relates to this distinguishing circumstance of its construction. Fig. 26. represents a section of the bottom of the harrel, where AA is the barrel and BB the bottom, which has in its middle a hollow cylinder CCFF, projecting about half an inch into the barrel at CC, and extending a good way downwards to FF. The space between this projeetion and the sides of the barrel is filled up by a brass ring DD, over the top of which is strained a piece of oiled silk EE, which performs the office of a valve, covering the hole CCC But this hole is filled up by a piece of brass, or rather an assemblage oſ pieces screwed together GGHHII. It consists of three projecting fillets or shoulders GG, HH, II, which form two hollows between them, and which are filled with rings of oiled leather OO, PP, ſirmly screwed iogether. The extreme ſillets GG, II, are oſ equal diameter vith the inside of the cylinder, so as to fill it exactly, and the whole stuffed with oiled leather, slide up and down without allowing any air to passs. The middle fillet HH is not m broad, but thicker. In the upper fillet GG there is formed a shallow dish about  of an inch deep and à wide. This dish is covered with æ thin plate, pierced with a grating like Mr Smeatons valve-plat. There is a perforation VX along the axis oſ this piecœ, which has a pussage out at one side H, through the middle fillet. Opposite to this passage, and in the side oſ the eylinder CCFF, is a hole M, communicating with the conduit pipe MN, which leads to the receiver. Inio the lower end of the perſoration is screwed the pin KL, whose tail L passes through the cap FF. The tail L is connected with a lever RQ, moveable round the joint Q. This lever is pushed upwards by a spring, and thus the whole piece which we have been deribing is kept in contact with the slip of ciled silk or valve EE. This is the usual situation of things. Now suppose a void formed in the barrel by draving up the piaton, the elasticity oſ the air in the receiver, in the pipe NM, and in the passage XV, will press on the great surface oſ the valve exposed through the grating, vill raise it, and the pump vill perſorm precisely as Mr Smeaton's does. But suppose the rarefaction to have been 50 long continued, that the air is no longer able to raise the valve; this will be seen by the mercury rising no more in the pump-gage When this is perceived, the operator must press with his ſfoot on the end R of the lever RQ. This draws down the pin KL, and vith it the whole hollov plug vith its grated top. And thus, instead of raising the valve from its plate, the plate is here drawn down from the valve. The air now gets in without any obstruetion whatever, and the rareſaction proceeds as long as the piston rises. When it is at the top of the byrrel, the operator takes his ſool fxom the lever, and the spring presses up the plug agein snd shuts the valvee. The piston-rod passes through a <ollar oſ leather, as in Mr Smeaton's pump, and the air às fſinally discharged through an outward valve in the top of the barre. These parts have nothing peculiar in them. This i; an ingenious contrivance, similar to what was adopted by Gusricke himselſ; and ve have no doubt of these pumps performing extremely vell if careſully made: and it seems not difficult to keep the plug perſectly airtight by supplying plenty of cil to the leathers We cannot say, however, with precision what may he expected from it, as no account has been given of its eſfects besides what Mr Cavallo published in the Philosophical Transaetions 1783, where he only says, that when it had been long used, it had, in the course of some experiments, rareſied 600 times. Aiming still at the removing the obstruotions to the entry of the air from the receiver into the barrels, Mr Frince, an American, has constructed a pump in which there is no valve or cock whatever between them. In this pump the piston-rod passes through a collar oſ leathers, and the air is finally discharged through a valve, as in the two last. But we are chieſly to attend, in this place, to the communication between the barrel and the receiver. The barrel videns below into a sort of cistern ABGD (Fig. 30.), communieating with the receiver by the pipe EF. As soon, thereſore, as the piston gets into this wider port, where there is a vacaney all round it, the air of the receiver expands ſreely through the passage FEE into the barrel, in vhich the descent of the piston had made a voidl. When the piston is again drawn up, as soon as ĩt gets into the eylindrie part of the barrel, which it exactly fills, it carries up the air before it, and expels it by the top valve; and, that this may be done more completely, this valve opens into a second barrel, or air-pump, whose piston is rising at the same time, and therefore the valve of comm unicatin (hich is the discharging valve oſ the primary pumpu; opens with the same facility as Mr Smeaton's piston-valve Wahile the piston is rising, the air in the recœiver ex pands into the barrel; and when the piston descends, the æir in the barrel again collapses till the piston gets again inio the cistern, vhen the air passes out, and fills the evacuated barrel, to be expelled by the piston as heſore. No distinct account has as yet been given of the performance of this pump. We only learn that great incoveniences were experienced from the oscillations oſ the mercury in the gage. As soon as the piston comes into the cistern, the ãir ſfrom the receiver immediately rushes into the barrel, and the mercury shoots up in the gage, and gets nto a state of oscillationn. The subsequent rise of the piston vill frequently keep time vith the second oscillation, and increase itt. The descent of the piston produces a downward oscillation, by allowing the air below it to cllapse; and, by improperly timing the strokes, this oillation becomes so great as to make the mercury enter the pump. To prevent this, and a greater irregularity of working as a condenser, valves were put in the piston: but as these require force to open them, the addition seemed rather  increase the evil, by rendering the oscillations more simultaneous with the ordinary rate of working. If this could be got over, the construction seems very promising. It appears, however, of very diſfieult execution. It has many long, slender, and crooked passages, which must be drilled through broad plates of brass, some of them appearing scarcely practicable. It is rare to find plates and other pieces of brass without air-holes, which it would be very diſficult to find out and to close; and it must be very diſfieult to clear it of obstructions: so that it appears rther a suggestion of theory than a thing warranted by its actual performance. Mr Lavoisier, or some oſ the naturalists who were oc- PNEUMATICS. 6O5 upied in concert with him in the investigation of the difAerent species of gas which are disengaged from bodies àn the course of chemical operations, has contrived an airPump Which has great appearance of simplicity, and, beãng very different from all others, deserves to be taken notice oſ : It eonsists of two barrels I, m, Fig. l. with solid pistons æ&. The pump-plate a b is pierced at its centre c with a hole whieh branches towards each of the barrels, as represented by c d, c . Between the plate and the barrels slides another plate h i, pierced in the middle with a branched hole 7d g, and near the ends with two holes h h, 4 i, which go from its underside to the endss. The holes in these two plates are so adjusted, that when the plate h i &s drawn so far towards h that the hole i comes within the barrel m, the branch ò foſ the hole in the middle plate coincides with the branch c d of the upper plate, and the holes è,  are shutt. Thus a communication is established between the barrel I and the receiver on the pump-plate, and between the harrel m and the external air. In this situation the burrel I ill exhaust, and m will discharge. When the piston of  is at its mouth, and that of m touches its bottom, the sliding plate is shifted over to the other side, so that m communicates with the receiver through the passage g d, e c, and I communicates with the air by the passages h h. It is evident that this sliding plate performs the oſfice of four cocks in a very beautiful and simple manner, and that if the pistons apply close to the ends oſ the barrels, 50 as to expel the whole air, the pump ill be perſect. It vorks, indeed, against the whole pressure of the external air. But this may be avoided by putting valves on the holes h, i; and these can do no harm, because the air remaining in them never gets back into the barrel till the piston be at the farther end, and the exhaustion of that stroke completed. But the best workmen of London think that it will be incomparably more diſficult to execute this cœ (ſor it is a cock of an unusual form), in such a manner that it shall be air-tight, and yet move with iolerable ease, and that it is much more liable to wearing loose than common cocks. No accurate accounts have heen receivel of its performance. It must be acknowledged to be ingenious, and it may suggest to an intelligent artist a method oſ ombining common conical cocks upon one axis so as to ansver the same purposes much more efſſectually; ſor which reason we have inserted it here. The last improvement which we shall mention is that published by Mr Cuthbertson, philosophical instrumentmaker in Amsterdam. His pump has given such evidences of its perfection, that we can hardly expect or vish for any thing more complete. But we must be allovel to observe, beforehand, that the same construction was invented, and, in part, executed before the end of 1779, hy Dr Daniel Rutherſord, now professor of botany in the university of Edinburgh, who was at that time engaged in experiments on the production of air during the combustion of bodies in contact with nitre, and who was vasily desirous oſ procuring a more complete ahstraction of pure aerial matter than could be effected by Mr Smeaton's pumpThe compiler of this article had then an opportunity oſ perusing the Doctor's dissertation on this subject, which was read in the Philosophical Society of Edinburgh. In this dissertation the Doctor appears ſully apprised of the existence of pure vital air in the nitrous acid as its chieſ igredient, and as the cause oſ its most remarkable phenomena, and to want bul a step to the discoyeries which hav ennobled the name of Mr Lavoisie- He was particularly anxious to obtain apart this distinguishing ingredient in its composition, and, ſor this purpose, to abstract completely from the vessel in which he subjected it to examination, every particle of elastic matter. The writer of this article proposed to him to cover the bottom of Mr Smeatons pi- ton with some clammy matter, which should take hold of the bottom valve, and start it vhen the piston was drawn up. A ſew days aſter, the Doctor showed him a drawing of æ pump, having a conical metal valve in the hottom, furnished with a long slender wire, sliding in the inside of the pistonrod vith a gentle friction, sufficient for lifting the valve, and secured against all chance of ſailure by a spring a-top, which took hold of a notch in the inside of the pistonrod about a quarter of an inch ſrom the lower end, so as certainly to lift the valve during the last quarter of an inch of the piston's motion. Being an excellent mechanie, he had executed a valve on this principle, and vas fully satisfied with its performancee But having already confirmed his doetrines respecting the nitrous acid by incontrovertible experiments, his wishes to improve the air-pump lost their incitement, and he thought no more of it; and not long aſter this, the ardour of the philosophers of the Teylerian Society at Haerlem and Amsterdam excited the efforts of Mr Cuthbertson, their instrumentmaker, to the same purpose, and produced the most perfeet air-pump that has yet appearedlc We shall give a description of it, and an account of its performance, in the imventors own worũs. Cuthbertsons Air-Pump. Plate XI. Fig. is32. a perspective view of this pump, vith its two principal gages serewed into their places. These need not be used together, except in cases where the utmoòt exactness is requiredl. In common experiments one of them is removed, and a stop-screw put in ĩts place. When the pear-gage is used, a small round plate, on which the receiver may stand, must be first screwed into the hole at A; but this hole is stopped on other occasions with a screvm. When all the three gages are used, and the receiver is exhausted, the stop-screw B, at the bottom of the pump, must be unscrewed, to admit the air into the re- ceiver; but when they are not all used, either oſ the othæ stop-screws will answer this purpose. Fig. 83. represents a cross-bar for preventing the barrels from being shaken by working the pump, or by any accident. Its place in Fig. 32. is represented by the dotæd lines. It is confined in its place, and kept close down on the barrels by two slips of wood NN, which must be dram out, as vell as the serews OO, when the pump is to bæ taken asunder. Plate IX. contains a section of all the working paris of the pump, except the wheel and rack, in which there is nothing uncommon. Fig. 34. is a section of one of the barrels, with all its internal purts; and Fig. 35, 36, 37, and 88, are different parts of the piston, proportioned to the size of the barrel* and to one another. In Fig. 84. CD represents the barrel, F the collars of leathers, G a hollow cylindrical vessel to contain cil, R is also an cil-vessel to receive the oil vhich is drawn, along vith the air, through the hole a a, when the piston is dramn upvards; and, when this is full, the oil is carried over vith the air, along the tube T, into the cil-vessel G. cc is a wire which is driven upwards from the Fole a a by the passage of the air; and as soon as this has escaped, it ſalls down again by its ovn weight, shuts up the hole, and prevents all return of the air into the barre At à d are ſixed two pieces oſ brass, to keep the wire c c in a vertical direction, that it may accurately shut the hole H isa cylindrical wire or rod which carries the piston I, and is made hollow to receive a long wire 5 5, which opens and shuts the hole L; and on the other end of the wire O ĩs * The piston and barrel are I,65 inches in diameter, in proportion to which the scale is drawn. Figures 85, S6, 37, 38, are, however, of double size screved a nut, which, by stopping in the narrowest part oſ the hole, prevents the wire from being driven up too far. This wire and screw are more clearly seen in Fig. 35. and S6; they slide in a collar of leather r r, Fig. 85. and 38. in the middle piece of the piston. Fig. 37. and 38. are the two mean parts which compose the piston, and, vhen the Pieces 36. and 39. are added to it, the whole is represented by Fig. 35. Fig. 88. is a piece of brass oſ a conical form, with a shoulder at the bottom. A long hollow serew is cut in it, about ꝗ of its length, and the remainder of the hole, in which there is no serew, is oſ about the same diameter with the serewed part, except a thin plate at the end, vhich is of a width exactly equal to the thickness of 8 That part of the inside of the conical brass in which no thread is cut, is filled with oiled leathers with holes, through which  can slide stiſfly. There is also a male screw with a hole in iĩt, fitted to g⸗, serving to compress the leathers r . In Fig. 37. aaaa is the outside of the piston, the inside of which is turned so as exactly to fit the outside of Fig. 88. b b are round leathers about 660 in number, c c is a circular piece oſ brass of the size oſ the leathers, and d d is a serew serving to compress them. The screw at the end of Fig. 36. is made to fit the screw in Fig. 88. Nov if Fig. 39. be pushed into Fig. 38. this into Fig. 37. and Fig. 36. be screwed into the end of Fig. 36, these ill compose the whole of the piston, as represented in Fig. 35. H in Fig. 34. represents the same part as H in Fig. 85. and is that to which the rack is fixed. If, thereſore, this be drawn upwards, it ill cause Fig. 88. to shut close into Fig. 7, and drive out the air above it; and when it is pushed downward, it ill open as ſar as the shoulder a a ill permit, and suſfer air to pass through. AA Fig. 40. is the receiver plate, BB is a long square piece of brass, screwed into the under side of the plate, through which a hole is drilled corresponding to that in the centre oſ the receiverplates and vith three female serews, b, b, c. 7 The rarefaction of the air in the receiver is eſfecteò æ follows: Suppose the piston at the bottom oſ the barræl The inside of the barrel, ſfrom the top of the piston to a, contains common air. When the rod is dravn up, the upper part of the piston sticks fast in the barrel ſll the conical part connected with the rod shuts the conical hole, and its shoulder applies close to its bottom The piston is now shut, and therefore the whole is drawn up by the rack-work, driving the air before it through the hole a ⸗ into the oil-vessel at R, and out into the room by the tube T. The piston will then be at the top of the barrel at a, and the wire ⸗ vill stand nearly as represented in the figure just raised ſrom the hole L, and prevented from rising high by the nut O. During this motion the air vill expand in the receiver, and come along the bent tube æ into the barrel. Thus the barrel will be ſilled with æu, which, as the piston rises, will be rarefied in proportion a the capacity of the receiver, pipes, and burrel, is to the barrel alone When the piston is moved down again by the rack-work,it ill force the conical part, Fig. 36. out of the hollow part, Fig. 87. as far as the shoulders a a; Fig. 85. will rest on a a, Fig. 37. which vill then be so ſar open as to permit the air to pass freely through it, while at the same time the end of ⸗ is forced against the top of the hole, and shuts it in order to prevent any air from returning into the receiver. Thus the piston, moving domvards, suffers the air to pass out between the sides of Fig 87. and 38.; and, when it is at the bottom oſ the barrel, vill have the column of air above it; and consequently, when drawn upwards ĩt will shut, and drive out this air, and, by opening the hole L at the same time, will give a free passage to more air from the receiver. This process being continued, the air of the receiver will be rareſied as far as its expansive power will permit. For in this mahine there are no valves to be forced open by the elasticity e air in the receiver, which at last ĩt is unable to effect. There is thereſore nothing to prevent the air ſrom expanding to its utmost degree. It may be suspected here, that as the air must escape through the discharging passage a c, Plate XI. Fig. 34. against the pressure of a column of oil and the weight oſ the wire, there will remain in this passage a quantity of air of considerable density, which will expand again into the barrel during the descent of the piston, and thus put a stop to the progress oſ rarefaction. This is the case in Mr Smeatons pump, and all which have valves in the piston. But it is the peculiar excellency of this pump, that whatever be the density oſ the air remaining in a c, the rareſaction vill still go on. It is worth while to be perfectly convinced of this Let us suppose that the air contained in ac is,3, part of the common air vhich would ſill the barrel, and that the capacity of the barrel is equal to that oſ the receiver and passages, and that the air in the receiver and harrel is of the same density, the piston being at the hottom of the barrel. The barrel will therefore contain ,335 parts of its natural quantity, and the receiver 335. Now let the piston be dravn up: No air will be discharged at a c, because it will contain the whole air which was in the barrel, and which has now collapsed into its ordinary bulk. But this does not in the least hinder the air of the receiver from æxpanding into the barrel, and diſfusing itself equally between both. Each will now contain, ſʒ of their ordinary quantity when the piston is at the top, and a c vill contain 35 as beſore, or 1385- Now push down the pistonn. The hole L is instantly shut, and the air in a c expands into the barrel, and the barrel now contains; 335 When the piston has reached the bottom, let it be again drawn up. There will be , ſ-5 discharged through c, and the air in the receiver vill again be equally distributed between it and the barrel l Thereſore the receiver wiĩl now contain h When the l Vou. III. 2Q piston reaches the bottom, there ill be ; in the barrel When again dravn up to the top, there will be ni : 7000° and vhen the piston reaches the bottom, there will be  l At the discharged, and the receiver will contain next stroke the receiver will contain only niœ &c. &e Thus it appears, that notwithstanding the, 13, which always expands back again out of the hole a c into the barrel, the rarity of the air in the receiver ill be doubled at every stroke. There is therefore no need of a subsidiary air-pump at c, as in the American air- pump, and n the Swedish attempt to improve Smeatons. In using this air-pump no particular directions are necessary, nor is any peculiar care necessary for keeping it in order, except that the oil-vessel A be always kept about half full of oi. When the pump has stood long vithout being used, it will be proper to draw a table-spoonful oſ olive-oil through it, by pouring it into the hole in the middle of the receiver-plate when the piston is at the bottom of the barrel. Then by working the piston, the oil vill be drawn through all the parts of the pump, and the surplus will be driven through the tube T into the oilvessel GNear the top oſ the piston-rod at H there is a hole which lets some oil into the inside of the rod, which gets at the collar of leathers  7, and keeps the wire air- tight. When the pump is used for condensation at the same time that it rarefies, or separately, the piece containing the bent tube T must be removed, and Fig. 4l. put into its place, and fixed by its screws. Fig. 41. as drawn in the plate, is intended for a double-barrelled pump. But for a single barrel only one piece is used, represented by b a o, the double piece being cut off at the dotted line a a. In this piece is a female screw to receive the end of a long brass tube, to which a bladder (if sufficient for the experiment of condensation), or a glass, properly secured for this purpose, must be serewed. Then the air which is abstracted from the receiver on the pump-plate vill be forced into the bladder or glass But if the pump be double, the apparatus Fig. 41. is used, and the long brass tube screwed on at c. Fig. 42. and 48. represent the two gages, which vill be sufficiently explained aſterwardss Fig. 42. is screwed into c b, or into the serew at the other end of c Fig. 40. and Fig. 43. into the screw a b Fig. 40. IF it be used as a single pump, either to rarefy or condense, the screw K, which fastens the rack to the pistonrod H, must be taken out. Then turning the winch till H is depressed as low as possible, the machine will be fitted to exhaust as a single pump; and if it be required to condense, the direction formerly given must be observed vith regard to the tube T and Fig. 42.  J took (says Mr Cuthbertson) two barometer-tubes of an equal bore with that fixed to the pump. These were filled with mercury four times boiledl. They were then compared, and stood exactly at the same : height. The mereury in one of them was boiled in it four times more, without making any change in their height; they were thereſore judged very perſeet. One of these was immersed in the cistern of the pump-gage, and fastened in a position parallel to it, and a sliding scale of one ineh vas attached to it. This scale, when the gage is used, must have its upper edge set equal with the surſace of the mercury in the boiled tube after exhaustion, and the difference between the height of the mercury in this and in the other barometer-tube may he observed to the ,3, of an inch; and being close together, no error arises from their not being exactly vertieal, if they are only parallel This gage vill be better understood by inspecting Fig. 43.  J used a second gage, which IT shall eall a double ꝶphonSee plate XI. Fig. 42. This was alo prepared vith the utmost care. I had a scale for measuring the difference between the height of the columm n the two legs. It was an inch long, and divided as the ſormer, and kept in a truly vertical position by suspending it from a point with a weight hung to it, as represented in the figuree Upon comparing these two gages, I alWay found them to indicate the same degree oſ rareſaction I also used a pear-gage, though the most imperſect of all, in order to repeat the curious experiments of Mr Naime and others. When experiments require the utmost rareſying gover of the pump, the receiver must not be placed on leather, either oiled or soaked in water, as is usually donee The pump-plate and the edge of the receiver must be ground very ſlat and true, and this with very fine emery, that m roughness may remain. The plate of the pump must then be wiped very clean and very dry, and the receiver rubbed vith a warm cloth till it become electrica. The recever being now set on the plate, hogs lard, èither alone or mixed vith a little oil, vhich has been cleared oſ water hy boiling, must be smeared round its outside edge. In this condition the pump will rarefy its utmost, and what stil remains in the receiver will be permanent air. Or a littl of this composition may be thinly smeared on the pump plate; this will prevent all risk of seratching it with te edge of the receiver. Leather oſ very uniform thicknes long dried before a fire, and well soaked in this compostion, which must be cleared of all water by the fſirst hoiling, will answer very well, and is expeditious, when rcœivers are to be frequently shiſted. Other leathers should be at hand soaked in a composition eontãining a ſittle rosin This gives it a clamminess which renders it impermeuble o air, and is very proper at àll joints of the pump, and all apparatus for pneumatic experiments. As ĩt ĩs imposihle to render the penr-gage as dry as other parts oſ the appa- rutus, there vill he generally some variation between this and the other gages. When it is only intended to show the utmost power of the pump, without intending to ascertain the quality of the residuum, the receiver may be set on vet leather. If in this condition, the air be rareſied as ſar as possible, the syphon and harometer-gage will indicate a less degree of rareſaction than in the former experiments. But when the àir is let in again, the pear-gage vill point out a rareſaction 50me thousands of times greater than it did beforee If the true quality of permanent air aſter exhaustion he required, the pear-gage ill be nearest the truth: ſor when the air is rareſied to à certain degree, the moistened leather emits an expansible fluid, which, ſilling the receiver, forces out the permanent air; and the two first gages indicate a degree of exhaustion which relates to the whole elastic matter remaining in the receiver, viz. to the expansible fluid together with the permanent air; whereas the pear- gage points out the degree of exhaustion, with relation to the permanent air alone, which remains in the receiver; for by the pressure of the air admitted into the receiver, the elastic vapour is reduced to its former bulk, which is imperceptible. Many hodies emit this elastic fluid when the pressure of the air is much diminished; a piece oſ leather, in ĩts ordinary damp state, about an inch square, or a bit of green or dry wood, vill supply this for a great while. When such ſluids have been generated in any experiments, the pump must be careſully cleared oſ them, for they remain not only in the receiver, but in the barrels and passages, and vill again expand when the exhaustion has been carried far. The best method of clearing the pump is to take a very large receiver, and use every precaution to exhaust it as ſar as possiblee. Then the expansible matter lurking in the harrels and passes will be diſſused through the receiver also, or vill be carried off along with ĩts air. It will as much rarer than it was before, as the aggregate capacity of the receiver barrels and passes is larger than that of the two last. The performance of the pump may be judged oſ from the four following experiments : The two gages being screwed into their places, and the hole in the receiver-plate shut up, the pump was made to exhaust as far as it could. The mercury in the legs of the syphon was only 5 of an inch out of the level, and that in the boiled barometer- tube J; of an inch higher than in the one screved to the pump. A standard barometer then stood at 30 inches, and thereſore the pump rareſied the permanent air 1200 times. This is twice as much as Mr Nairne found Mr Smeatons do in ĩts best state. Mr Cavallo seems disposed to give a favourable (7hile ve must suppose it a just) account of Haas and Hurter's pump, and it appears never to have exceeded GOO times. Mr Cuthbertson has often found the mercury within ;3, oſ an inch of the level in the syphon-gage, indicating a rareſaction of 3000. To one end of a glass tube, 2 inches diameter and S0 inches long, was fitted a brass cap and collar oſ leather, through which a wire was inserted, reaching about two inches within the tubee. This was connected with the conductor of an electric machinee. The other end was ground ſlat and set on the pump-plate. When the gages indicated a rareſaction of 00, the light became steady and uniform, of a pale colour, though a little tinged with purple; at 600 the light was of a pale dusky white; when 1200 ĩt disp peared in the middle of the tube, and the tube conducted s0 well that the prime conductor only gave sparks so ſaint and short as to be scarcely pereeptible Aſter taking off the tube, and making it as dry as possible, it was again connected with the conduetor, which was giving sparks two inches long. When the air in it was rareſied ten times, the sputks were of the same length. Sometimes a pencil of light darted along the tubee When the rareſuction was 20, the spark did not exceed an inch, and light streamed the whole length of the tubee. When the rarefaction was 0, the sparks were half an inch, and the light rushed along the tube in great streams. When the rarefaction was 100, the sparks were about } of an inch long, and the light filled the tube in an uninterrupted body. When 800, the appearances were as beforee When 600, the sparks were 2;, and the light was of a faint white colour in the middle, but tinged with purple towards the endss When 1200, the light was hardly perceptible in the middle, and was much fainter at the ends than before, but still ruddy. When 1400, which was the most the pump could produce, six inches of the middle of the tube were quite dark, and the ends free oſ any tinge of red, and the sparks did not exceed 5 of an inch. Although this noble instrument originated in Germany, all its improvements were made in this kKingdom. Both the mechanical and pneumatical principles of Mr Boyles construetion were extremely diſferent from the German, and, in respect of expedition and conveniency, much superior. The double: barrel and gage by Hawkesbee vere capital improvements, and on principle; and Mr Smeatons method of making the piston work in rarefied air made a complete change in the whole process. Aided by this machine, ve can make experiments establishing and illustrating the gravity and elasticity of the air in a much more perspicuous manner than could be done by the spontaneous phenomena of nature. It allows us in the first place to show the materiality of air in a very distinet manner. Bodies cannot move about in the atmosphere without displacing it. This requires force; and the resistance of the air always diminishes the velocity of bodies moving in it. A heavy body therefore has the velocity oſ its fall diminished; and if the quantity of air displaced be very great, the diminution vill be very considerablee This is the reason why light bodies, such as feathers, fall very slowly. Their moving fore is very small, and ean therefore displace a great quantity oſ air only with a very small velocity. But if the same body bæ dropped in vacuo, vhen there is no air to be displaced, ĩt falls with the whole velocity competent to its gravityFig. 44. Plate XII. represents an apparatus by which a guinea and a downy feather are dropped at the same nstant, by opening the foreeps which holds them by means of the slip-wire in the top of the receiver. If this be done aſter the air has been pumped out, the guinea and the ſeather will be observed to reach the hottom at the same instant. Fig. 45. represents another apparatus for showing the same thing. It consists of two sets of brass vanes put in separate axles, in the manner of windmill sailss. One set has their edges placed in the direction of their whirling motion, that is, in a plane to which the axis is perpendicular. The planes of the other set pass through the axis, and they are thereſore trimmed so as directly to front the air through which they move. Two springs act upon pins projecting ſfrom the axis; and their strength or tensions are so adjusted, that vhen they are disengaged in vocuo, the two sets continue in motion equally long. If they are disengaged in the air, the vanes which beat the air vith their planes will stop long beli- those which cut it edge vise. We can now abstract the air almost completely from a dry vessel, s0 as to know the precise weight of the air vhich filled it. The first experiment we have oſ this kind, done with accuracy, is that of Dr Hooke, Feb. 10, 1664, when he ſound I14 pints of air to weigh 945 grains. On pint of water was 85 ounees. This gives for the speciſic gravity of air 41, very nearly. 4 Since ve are thus immersed in a gravitating fluid, it ſollows, that every body preponderates only with the excess of ĩts own weight above that of the air which it displaces; for every body loses by this immersion the weight oſ the displaced air. A cubic foot loses about 52lgrains in frosty weather. We see balloons even rise in the air, as a Piece of crk rises in vaterr. A mass oſ vater which really contains 850 pounds vill lond the scale of a balance with 549 only, and vill be balanced by about 8493 pounds of brass. This is evinced by a very pretty experiment, represented in Fig. 6. A small beam is suspended within a receiver. To one end of the beam is appended a thin glass or copper ball, close in every part. This is balanced by a small piece of lead hung on the other arm. As the air is pumped out of the receiver, the ball vill gradually preponderate, and vill regain its equilibrium vhen the air is re-admitted. There is a case in which this observation is oſf oonsequence to the philosopher: we mean the measuring of time by pendulums. As the accelerating force on a pendulum is not its vhole weight, but the excess of its weight over that of the displaced air, it follows that a pendulum vill vibrate more slowly in the air than in vacuo. A pendulum composed of lead, iron, and brass, may be about 8400 times heavier than the air whieh it displaces when the barometer is at 30 inches and the thermometer at 829, and the accelerating ſorce will be diminished about ,5445This will cause a second pendulum to make about ſive vibrations less in a day than it would do in vacuo. In order therefore to deduce the accelerative power of gravity from the length of a pendulum vibrating in the air, ve must make an allowance of 0, 17, or 54 of a second, per day, for every inch that the barometer stands lower than 0 inches. But we must also note the temperature of the air; hecause, when the air is varm, it is less densc when supporting by its elasticity the same weight oſ umosphere, and we must know how much its density is diminished by an increase oſ temperaturee. The orrection is still more complicated; for the change of density aſfects the resistance of the air, and this affects the time oſ the vibration, and this by a law that is not yet well ascertamed. As ſar as ve can determine from any experiments that have been made, lit appears that the change arising from the altered resistance takes off about à of the change produced by the altered density, and that a second pendulum makes but three vibrations a-day more in vacuo than in the open air. This is a very unexpeeted result; but it must be owned that the experiments have neither been numerous nor very nicely made. The air-pump also allows us to show the effects oſ th] air's pressure in a great number of amusing and instructive phenomena. When the air is abstracted from the receiver, it is strongly pressed to the pump-plate by the incumbent atmosphere, and it supports this great pressure in consequence oſ its circular form. Being equally compressed on all sides, there is no place where it should give way rather than another; but if it be thin, and not very round, which is sometimes the case, it will be crushed to piecess. I w take a square thin phial, and apply an exhausting syringe to its mouth, it will not fail being erushed. As the operation of pumping is something like sucking, many of these phenomena are in common discourse aseribed to suction, a vord much abused; and this abuse misleads the mind exceedingly in its contemplation of natural phenomena. Nothing is more usual than to speak oſ the suction of a syringe, the suetion and draught of a chimney, &e. The following experiment puts the true cause of the strong adhesion of the receiver beyond a doubt: Place a small receiver or cupping-glass on the pump- Plate, without covering the central hole, as represented in Fig. 47, and cover it with a larger receiverr. Exhaust the æĩr ſrom it; then admit it as suddenly as possible The outer receiver, which after the rareſaction adhered strongly to the plate, is now loose, and the cupping-glass will be found sticking fast to it. While the rarefaction was going on, the air in the small receiver also expanded, escaped from it, and vas abstracted by the pump. When the external air vas suddenly admitted, it pressed on the small receiver, and forced it down to the plate, and thus shut up all entry. The small receiver must now adhere; and there can he no suction, for the pipe of the pump was on the outiiſs of the cupping-glass. This experiment sometimes does not suceeed, hecause the air finds a passage under the brim of the cuppingglass. But if the cupping-glass be pressed down by the hand on the greasy leather or plate, every thing will be made smooth, and the glass will be so little raised by the expansion of its air during the punping, that it will instantly clap close when the air is re-admitted. In like manner, if a thin square phial be furnished with a valve, opening from within, but shutting when pressed from without, and if this phial be put under a receiver, and the air be abstracted from the receiver, the air in the phial vill expand during the rareſaction, ill escape through the valve, and be at last in a very rarefied state within the phial. If the air be now admitted into the receiver, it will press on the flat sides oſ the included phial, and crush it to pieces. See Fig. 48. If a piece of wet ox-bladder be laid over the top of a receiver whose orifice is about four inches wide, and the air be exhausted from within it, the incumbent atmosphere will press down the bladder into a hollow form, and then burst it inward with a prodigious noise. See Fig. 49. Or if a piece oſ thin ſlat glass be laid over the receiver, with an oiled leather between them to make the juncture air- tight, the glass will be broken downwardss This must he done vith caution, because the piecęs of glass sometimes ſly about vith great foreę. If there be formed two hemispherical cups of brass, with very flat thick brims, and one of them be fitted with a nect and stop-cock, as represented by Fig. 50. the air may babstracted from them by serewing the neck into the hole in the pump-platee. To prevent the insinuation of air, a ring of oiled leather may be put between the rims. Now nscrew the sphere ſrom the pump, and six hooks to each, and suspend them from a strong nãil, and hang a scale  the lowest. It will require a considerable weight to separate them; namely, about 15 pounds for every square inch of the great circle of the sphere. If this be four inches dimeter, it will require near 190 pounds. This pretty æperiment was first made by Otto Guericke, and on a very great scalee His sphere was of a large size, and, when exhausted, the hemispheres could not he dravn asunder by 20 horses. It was exhibited, along with many othes equally eurious and magniſicent, to the Emperor of Germany and his court, at the breaking up of the diet oſ Ratisbon in 1664If the loaded syringe mentioned in No I6. be suspended by its piston from the hook in the top plate of the receiver, as in Fig. 5l. and the air be abstracted by the pump, the syringe vill gradually descend (because the elasticity of te air, which ſormerly balanced the pressure of the atmosphere, is now diminished by its expansion, and is thereſore no longer able to press the syringe to the piston), and it vill at last drop off,. If the air be admitted before this happens, the syringe ill immediately rise again. Screv a short brass pipe into the neck of a transporter, on which is set a tall receiver, and immerse it into a cistern of water. On opening the cork the pressure oſ thæe qir on the surſace of the water in the cistern will foree ĩt up through the pipe, und cause it to spout into the receĩver with a strong jet, beeause there is no air within to balance by its elasticity the pressure of the atmosphere. See Fig. 52. Tt is in the same way that the gage of the air-pump performs its offic The pressure of the atmosphere raises the mercury in the gage, till the weight of the mereury, togęther vith the remaining elasticity ofthe air in the receiver, are inequilibrio with the whole pressure of the atmosphere: thereſfore the height and weight of the mercury in the gage is the excess of the weight of the atmosphere above the elasticity of the included air; and the deficiency of this height from that oſ the mereury in the Toricellian tube is the mensure of this remaining elasticity. If a Toricellian tube be put under a tall receiver, as shown in Fig. 58. anũ the ait be exhausted, the mercury in the tube vill descend while that in the gage vill rise; and the sum of their heights will always be the same, that is, qunl to the height in an ordinary barometer. The height of the mercury in the receiver is the effeet and measure of the remaining elasticity of the ineluded air, and the height in the pump-gage is the unbalanced pressure of the atmosphere. This is a very instructive experiment, perſectly similur to Mr Auzout's, formerly mentioned, and eompletely establishes and illustrates the whole doctrine oſ atmospherie pressure. We get a similar illustration and cunfirmation (if sueh a thing be now needed) of the cause oſ the rise of water in pumps, by serewing a syringe into the top plate of a receiver, which syringe has a short glass pipe plunging into a small cup of water. See Fig. 54. When the piston-rod is druwn up, the water rises in the gltss pipe, as in any other pump, of which this is a miniature representation. But if the air has been previously exhausted from the re- ceiver, there is nothing to press on the water in the litie jar; and it will not rise in the glass pipe though the pism: of the syringe be drawn to the top. Analogous to the rise oſ water in pumps is is riæ] and motion in syphons. Suppose a pipe ABCD, Fig. 55. bent at right angles at B and C, and having its two ends immersed in the cisterns of water A and D. Let the leg CD be longer than the leg BA, and let the whole be full of water. The vater is pressed upwards at A vith a ſure equal to the weight of the column of air EA reaching o the top of the atmosphere; but it is pressed downwards by the weight of the clumn of water BA. The vater at E is pressed downwards by the weight of the column CD, and upwards by the weight of the column oſ air FD reaching to the top oſ the atmospheree The two eolumns of air difer very little in their weight, and may without any sensble error be considered as equal. Therefore there is a superiority of pressure downwards at D, and the water vill flow out theree The pressure of the air will raise the water in the leg AB, and thus the stream will be kept up tl the vessel A is emptied as low as the orifice oſ the leg BA, provided the height of AB is not greater than what the pressure of the atmosphere can balance, that is, does not exceed 32 or 83 feet for water, S30 inches for mercury, & A syphon then will alvays run from that vessel whoæ surface is highest; the form of the pipe is indifferent, hecause the hydrostatical pressures depend on the vertial height only. It must be filled with water by some other contrivance, such as a fumnel, or a pump applied a-top; and the funnel must be stopped up, otherwise the air would get in, and the water would fall in both legs. If the syphon have equal legs, as in Fig. 56. and be turned up at the ends, it vill remain full oſ water, and be ready for use It need only be dipped into any vessel of vater, and the water will then flow out at the other end oſ 6 the syphon. This is ealled the Wirtemberg syphon, and is represented in Fig. 56. What is called the syphon fountain, construeted on this principle, is shown in Fig. 57. where AB is a tall receiver, standing in a vide basin DE, which is supported on the pedestal H by the hollow pillar FG. In the centre of the receiver is a jet pipe C, and in the top a ground stopper A. Near the base of the pillar is a cock N, and in the pedestal is another cock O. Fill the basin DE with water within half an inch oſ the brim. Then pour in water at the top of the receiver (the cock N being shut) till it is about half full, and then put in the stopper. A little water ill run out into the vessel DE. But beſore it runs over, open the cock N, and the water will run into the cistern H; and by the time that the pipe C appears above water, a jet will rise from it, and continue as long as water is supplied from the basin DE. The passage into the base cistern may be so tempered by the cock N that the water within the receiver shall keep at the same height, and what runs into the base may be received from the cock O into another vessel, and returned into DE, to keep up the stream. This pretty philosophical toy may be construeted in the following manmer. BB, Fig. 58, is the ferril or cap into which the receiver is cemented. From its centre descends the jet pipe C a, sloping outwards, to give room for the discharging-pipe b d of larger diameter, whose lover extremity d fits tightly into the top of the hollow pillar FG. The operation of the toy is easily understood. Suppose the distance from C to H (No I.) three feet, which is about 2, oſ the height at which the atmosphere would support a column of water. The water poured into AB would descend through FG (the hole A heing shut) till the air has expanded ſ;, and then it would stop. If the pipe Ca be now opened, the pressure of the air on the surſace of the water in the cistern DE vill cause it to spout trough ſ to the height of three ſeet nearly, and the wte vill tinue to descend through the pipe FG. By tempeing the cock N 50 as to allow the water to pass through it is ſast as it is supplied by the jet, the amusement may be tmti nued a long time. It will stop at last, however; beus as the jet is made into rareſied air, a little air vill be emcated from the water, which will gradually accumula n the receiver, and diminish its rareſaction, which is i moving cause of the jet. This indeed is an incomenæ⸗ felt in every employment of syphons, so much the non remarkably as their top is higher than the suriæ of the water in the cistern of supply. Cases oſ this employment of a syphon are mt uir quent. When water collected at A (Fig. 59.) is to beonducted in a pipe to C, situated in a lower part oſ the œtry, it sometimes happens, as between Lochend and Leih that the intervening ground is higher than the ſuntiinhead as at B. A forcing pump is erected at A, ud the vater forced along the pipe. Once it runs out a ũ, æ pump may be removed, and the water ill contime lo un on the syphon principle, provided BD do not exeæi 53 feet. But the water in that part of the conduit vhich i above the horizontal plane AD, is in the same stale s no receiver of rareſied air, and gives out some of the urv is chemically united with it. This gradually accumiis in the elevated part oſ the conduit, and at last cholisi entirely. When this happens, the forcing pump at again be worked. Although the elevation in ſhe Laib conduit is only about eight or ten ſeet, it vill seldon n for 12 hours N. B. This air cannot be discharge by i usual air-cocks; for if there were an opening at B, the r would rush in, and immediately stop the motion This combination of air with water is very distinely æ by means of the air-pump. If a small glass conn cold water, fresh drawn ſrom the spring, be exposed, æ I Fig. 60. under the receiver, and the air rareſied, small bubbles will be observed to form on the inner surſace of the glass, or on the surſace oſ any body immersed in it, which vill increase in size, and then detach themselves from the glass and reach the top; as the rareſaction advances, the whole water begins to show very minute air-bubbles rising to the top; and this appearance will continue for a very long time, till it be completely disengaged Warming the water will occasion a still farther separation oſ air, and a boiling heat will separate all that can be disengaged. The reason assigned ſor these air-bubbles ſirst appearing on the surſace of the glass, &e. is, that air is attracted by bodies, and adheres to their surfacee This may be so. But it is more probably owing to the attraction of the water for the glass, which causes it to quit the air which it held in solution, in the same manner as ve see it happen when it is mixed with spirits of wine, with vitriolic acid, &e. or vhen salts or sugar are dissolved in it. For if we pour out the water which has been purged of air by hoiling in vacuo, and ſill the glass with fresh water, ve shall observe the same thing, although a film of the purified water was Ieſt adhering to the glass. In this case, there can be no air adhering to the glass. Water thus purged of air by hoiling (or even without boiling) in vacuo, will again absorb air vhen exposed to the atmospheree. The best demonstration of this is to fill vith this water a phial, leaving about the size of a pea not filled. Immerse this in a vessel of water, with the mouth undermost, by which means the air-bubble will mount up to the bottom of the phial. After some days standing in this condition, the air-bubble will be completely absorbed, and the vessel quite filled with water. The air in this state of chemical solution has lost its elasticity, for the water is not more compressible than common water. It is also found that water brought up from a great depth under ground contains much more air than water at Vou. III. 2 R the surface. Indeed fountain vaters differ excedingly in this respect. Other liquors contain much greater quantities of elastic fluids in this loosely combined state. A glass of beer treated in the same way will bo almost wholly converted into froth by the escape of ĩts ſixed air, and vil have lost entirely the prickling smartness which is s agreeable, and it become quite vapid. The air-pump gives us, in the next place, a great variety of experiments illustrative oſ the airs elasticity and expansibility. The very operation of exhaustion, as it is called, is an instance oſ its great, and hitherto unlimited, expunsibility. But this is not palpably exhibited to vies The following experiments shew it most distinetly: I. Put a flaceid bladder, of which the neck is firmly tied vith a thread, under a receiver, and work the pump. The bladder will gradually swell, and will even be fully ditended. Upon readmitting the air into the receiver, the bladder gradually collapses again into its former dimensions: while the bladder is ſlaccid, the air within it is oſ the same density and elasticity with the surrounding air, and its elasticity balances the pressure of the atmospheree When part of the air oſ the receiver is abstracted, the remainder expands so as still to ſill the receiver: but by expanding its elasticity is plainly diminished; for ve see by the ſact, that the elasticity of the air of the receiver no longer balances the elasticity of that in the bladder, as it no longer keeps it in its dimensions The air in the bladder expands also: it expands till its diminished elasticity is again in equilibrio with the diminished elasticity of the air in the receiver; that is, till its density is the same. When all the wrinkles of the bladder have disappeared, its air cm expand no more, although we continue to diminish the elasticity of the air of the receiver by further rarefaction. The bladder now tends to burst; and if it be pierced by a point or knife ſastened to the slip-wire, the air ill rush out, and the mereury descend rapidly in the gage. If a phial or tube be partly filled with water, and immersed in a vessel of water with the mouth downvards, the air will oceupy the upper part of the phial. If this appsratus be put under a receiver, and the air be abstracted, the air in the phial will gradually expund, allowing the water to run out by its weight till the surface of the water be on a level within and withoutt. When this is the case, we must grant that the density and elasticity oſ the air in the phial is the same vith that in the receiver. When we work the pump again, ve shall oberve the air in the phinl expand still more, and come out of the- water in bubbles. Continuing the operation, we shall see the air continually escaping from the phial: when this is over, it shows that the pump can rareſy no more. If we now admit the uir into the receiver, we shall see the water rise into the phial, and at last almost completely ſill ĩt, leaving only a very small bubble of air at top. This bubble had expanded s0 as to fill the whole phial. See this represented in Fig. 6l. Every one must have observed a cavity at the big end of an egg between the shell and the whit. The white and yolk are contained in a thin membrane or bladder which adheres loosely to the shell, but is detached from it at that part; and this cavity increases by keeping the egg in a dry placee. One may form a judgment of its size, and therefore of the freshness of the egę, by touching it with the tongue; for the shell, where it is not in contact with the contents, will presently feel warm, being quickly heated by the tongue, while the rest of the egęg vill feel eold. IF a hole be made in the opposite end of the egg, and it be set on a little tripod, and put under a receiver, the expansion of the air in the cavity oſ the egg vill force the contents through the hole till the egg be quite emptied: or, if nearly one half of the egg be taken avay at the other end, and the white and yolk taken out, and the shell be put under a receiver, and the air abstracted, the air in the cavity of the egg vill expand, gradually detaching the mem- brane from the shell, till it causes it to sWell out, and gives the whole the appearance of an entire egę?. In like manner shrivelled apples and other fruits will swell in vacuo by the expansion of the air confined in their cavities. If a piece oſ wood, a twig with green leaves, charenl, plaster oſ Paris, &e. be kept under water in vacuo, a prodigious quantity of air will be extracted; and if ve readmit the air into the receiver, it will force the water into the pores of the body. In this case the body vill not swim in water as it did before, shewing that the vegetahle fibres are speciſieally heavier than water. It is ſound, however, that the air contained in the pith and bark, sch as cork, is not all extricated in this vay; and that much of it is contained in vesicles vhich have no outlet: being secreted into them in the process of vegetation, as it is æ creted into the air- bladder of fishes, where it is generally found in a pretty compressed state, considerably denser than the surrounding air. The air-bladder of a fish is surrounded by circular and longitudinal museles, by which the fish can compress the air still further; and, by ceasing act with them, allow it to swell out again. It is in this manner that the fish can suit its specific gravity to its stuation in the water, so as to have no tendency either to rise or sink: but if the fish be put into the receiver oſ an air-pump, the rarefaction of the air obliges the fish to act more strongly with these contracting muscles, in order © adjust its speciſic gravity; and if too much air has been abstracted ſrom the receiver, the fish is no longer able to keep its air-bladder in the proper degree of compression It becomes thereſore too buoyant, and comes to the top of the water, and is obliged to struggle vith its tail and fſins in order to get down; frequently in vain. The air-bladder sometimes bursts, and the fish goes to the bottom, and can no longer keep above without the continual action of its tail and fins. When fishes die, they commonly float at top, their contractive action being now at an end. All this may be illustrated (but very imperſectly) by a small halſ- blown bladder, to which is appended a hit of lend, just so heavy as to make it sink in water; when this is put under a receiver, and the air abstracted, the bubble will rise to the top; and, by nicely adjusting the rareſaction, it may be kept at any heightSee Fig. 46. The playthings called Cartesian devils are similar to this: they are hollow glass figures, having a small aperture in the lower part of the figures, as at the point of the foot; their weight is adjusted so that they swim upright in vaterr. When put into a tall jar filled to the top, and having a piece of leather tied over it, they will sink in the water, by pressing on the leather with the ball of the hand: this, by compressing the water, forees some of it to enter into the figure, and makes it heavier than the water; for which reason it sinks, but rises again on removing the pressure of the hand. See Fig. 47, No l. and 2. If a half-blown ox-bladder be put into a box, and great/ weights laid on it, and the whole be put under a receiver, and the air abstracted, the air will, by expanding, lift up the weights, though above an hundred pounds. See By such experiments the great expansibility oſ the air is abundantly illustrated, as its compressibility was formerly by means of the condensing syring. We now see that the two sets of experiments form an uninterrupted chain; and that there is no particular state oſ the airs density vwhere the compressibility and expansibility is remarkably dissimilar. Air in its ordinary state expands; because its ordinary state is a state of compression by the weight of the atmosphere: and if there were a pit about 33 miles deep, the air at the bottom would probably be as dense as water; and if it were 50 miles deep, it would be as dense as gold, iſ it did not become a liquid before this depth: nay, if a bottle with its mouth undermost were immersed six miles under water, it would probably be as dense as vater; we say probably, for this depends on the nature of its compressibility; that is, on the relation which subsists hetween the compression and the forc which produms it. This is the circumstance of its constitution, which we now proceed to examine; and it is evidently a very mportant circumstance. We have long ago observed, that the great compressihility and permanent ſluidity of air, observed in a vast variety of phenomena, is totally inexplicable, on the supposition that the particles of æir are ſike 30 many balls of sponge or so0 many foot-balls. Give o those what compressibility you please, common air could no more be fluid than a mass of clay; it could no mæe he fluid than a mass of such balls pressed into a box. It em be demonstrated (and indeed hardly needs a demonstration), that before a parcel of such balls, just touching each other, can be squeezed into half their present dimensions, their globular shape vill be entirely gone, and each vill hav become a perfect cube, touching six other cubes with its whole surface; and these cubes vill be strongly compressed together, so that motion could never be performed through among them by any solid body without a very great ſore Whereas we know that in this state air is just as permeable to every hody as the common air that ve breathe. There is no way in which we can represent this fluidity to our imagination but by conceiving air to consist of particles, not only discrete, but distant ſfrom each other, ànd actuated by repulsive forces, or something analogous to them. It is an idle subterfuge, to which some naturalists have r course, saying, that they are kept asunder by an intervening ether, or elastic fluid of any other name. This is only rmoving the difficulty a step farther off; for the elasticity of this fluidity requires the same explanation; and thereſore it is necessary, in obedience to the rules of just ressoning, to begin the inquiry here; that is, to determine from the phenomena what is the analogy between the distances of the particles and the repulsive forces exerted at these distances, proceeding in the same way as in the exa- mination oſ planetary gravitation. We shall learn the analogy by attending to the analogy between the compressing ſorce and the density. For the density depends on the distance between the particles; the nearer they are to each other, the denser is the air. Suppose a square pipe one inch wide and eight inches long, shut at one end, and filled with common air; then suppose a plug so nicely fitted to this pipe that no air can pass by its sides; suppose this piston thrust down to vithin an inch of the hottom; it is evident that the air which formerly filled the whole pipe now occupies the space of one cubie inch, which contains the same number of particles as were formerly diſfused over eight cubie inches. The condensation would have been the same if the air which ſills a cube whose side is two inches had been squeezed into a cube of one inch, for the cube of two inehes also contains eight inchess. Now, in this case it is evident that the distanee between the particles would be reduced to its half in every direction. In like manner, if a cube whose side is three inches, and which thereſore contains 27 inches, be squeezed into one inch, the distance of the particles will be one third of what it was: in general the distance oſ the particles will be as the cube root of the space into which they are compressed. If the space be I, . ſn rbæ &e. of its former dimensions, the distance of the particles will be 4, à 4. 3. & Nov the term density, in its strict sense, expresses the vicinity of the particles; densi arbores are trees growing near each other. The measure of this vicinity therefore is the true measure of the density; and when  inches of air are compressed into one, ve should say that it is three times as dense; but we say, that it is 27 times denser. Density is therefore used in a sense different from its strictest acceptation: it expresses the comparative number of equidistant particles contained in the same bulk. This is also abundantly precise, vhen we compare bodies of the same kind, diſfering in density only; but we also say, that gold is I9 times denser than water, because the same hulk of it is 19 times heavierr. This assertion proceæĩs on the assumption, or the fact, that every ultimate atom of terrestrial matter is equally heavy; a particle of gold may contain more or fewer atoms of matter than a particle of water. In such a case, therefore, the term density has little or no reference to the vicinity of the particles; and is only a term of comparison of other qualities or accidents But when ve speak of the respective densities of the same substance in its different states of compression, the vord density is strictly connected with vicinity oſ particles, and ve may saſely take either of the measures. We shall ahide by the commun acceptation, and call that air ght times as dense which has eight times as many particles in the same bulk, although the particles are only twice as near to each other. Thus then we see, that by observing the analogy between the compressing force and the density, ve shall discover the analogy between the compressing ſorce and the distance of the particles. Now the force which is necessary for compressing two particles oſ air to a certain vicinity is a proper measure of the elasticity of the particles corresponding to that vicinity or distance; for it balances it, and forces which balance must be esteemed equal. Elasticity is a distinctive name for that corpuscular force which keeps the particles at that distance; thereſore observations made on the analogy between the compressing foree and the density of air will give us the law of its corpuscular force, in the same way that observations on the simultoneous deflections oſ the planets towards the sun give us the law of celestial gravitation. But the sensible compressing ſorees which we are able to apply is at once exerted on unknown thousands of particles, vhile it is the law oſ action of a single particle that we want to discover. We must therefore know the proportion f the numbers of particles on which the compressing ſoree arted. It is easy to see, that since the distance oſ the (Mem. Berlin, ix.), those by Fontana (Opus. PhyniœMaih.), and those by Shuckburgh and Gen. Roy. In order to examine the compressibility oſ air that is not rarer than the atmosphere at the surface oſ he earth, we employ a bent tube or cyphon ABCD (Fig. 6Gõ.), hermetically sealed at A and open at D. The short leg AB must he very accurately divided in the proportion oſ is solid contents, and ſitted with a scale whose units denote equal increments, not of length, but of capacity. Theæ are various ways of doing this; but it requires the most scrupulous attention, and without this the experiments are of no value. In particular, the arched form at A must he noticed. A small quantity of mercury must then be poured into the tubę, and passed backwards and forwards ũil it stands (the tube being held in a vertical position) on æ level at B and C. Then we are certain that the included air is of the same density with that of the contiguous atmospheree. Mercury is now poured into the leg DC, which vill fill it, suppose to G, and will compress the air into a smaller space AE. Drav the horizontal lIine EF: the new bulk of the compressed air is evidently AE, measured by the adjacent scale, and the addition made to the compressing force oſ the atmosphere is the weight of the column GF. Produce GF downwards to H, till FH is equal to the height shown by a Toricellian tube filled with the sume mercury; then the whole compressing foree is HG. This is evidently the measure of the elasticity of the compressed air in AE, for it balances itt. Now pour in more mercury, and let it rise to , compressing the ar into Aæ. Drav the horizontal line æf, and make ſh equal to FH; then A æ vill be the new bulk of the compressd ꝶir, 3 vill be its new density, and h  will be the measure of the new elasticity. This operation may be extended as ſar as we please, by lengthening the tube CD, and taking care that it be strong enough to resist the great pressuree Great care must be taken to keep the whole in |æ constant temperature, because the elasticity oſ air is greatly aſfeeted by heat, and the change by any increase of temperature is diſferent according to its density or compression. The experiments of Boyle, Mariotte, Amontons, and others, were not extended to very great compressions, the density of the air not having been quadrupled in any of them; nor do they seem to have been made vith very great nicety. It may be collected from them in general, that the elasticity of the air is very nearly proportioned to its density ; and accordingly this law was almost immediately acquiesced in, and was called the Boylean law: it is accordingly assumed by almost all writers on the subject ns exact. Of late years, however, there occurred questions in which it was of importance that this point should be more scrupulously settled, and the ſormer experiments vere repeated and extended. Sulzer and Fontana have carried them ſarther than any other. Sulzer compressed air into 3 of its former dimensions. Considerable varieties and irregularities are to be observed in these experiments. It is extremely difficult to preserve the temperature of the apparatus, particularly of the leg AB, which is most handled. A great quantity of mercury must be employed; and it does not appear that philosophers have been careful to have it precisely similar to that in the barometer, which gives us the unit of compressing force, and oſ elasticit. The mereury in the barometer should be pure and boiled. If the mercury in the syphon is adulterated with bismuth and tin, which it commonly is to a considerable degree, the compressing force, and consequently the elasticity, ill appeor greater than the truth. If the barometer has not been nicely fitted, it will be lower than it should be, and the compressing force will appear too great, hecause the unit is too small; and this error vill be most remarkable in the smaller compressions. The greatest source of error and irregularity. in the experiments is the very heterogeneous nature of the air itself. Air is a solvent of all fluids, all vapours, and perhaps of many solid bodies. It is highly improbable that the different compounds shall have the same elasticity, or even the same lav of elasticity: and it is well known, that air, loaded with water or other volatile bodies, is much more expansible by heat than pure air; nay, it would appear ſrom many experiments, that certain determinate changes both of density and of temperature, cause air to let go the vapours which it holds in solution. Cold causes it to precipitate water, as appears in dew; so does rareſaetion, as is seen in the receiver of an air-pump. In general, it appears that the elasticity of air does not increase quite so fast as its density. This will be best seen by the following tables, calculated from the experiments of M. Sulzer. The column E in each set of experiments expresses the length of the column GH, the unit being FH, while the column D expresses AB AE There appears in these experiments sufficient grounds for ealling in question the Boylean law; and the writer of this article thought it incumbent on him to repeat them with some precautions, which probably had not been attended to by Mr Sulzer. He was particularly anxious to have the air as free as possible from moisturee For this purpose, having detached the short leg of the syphon, which was 84 inches long, he boiled mercury in it, and filled it with mercury boiling hot. He took a tinplate vessel of suſficient capacity, and put into it a quantity oſ powdered quicklime just taken from the kiln; and having closed the mouth, he agitated the lime through the air in the vessel, and allowed it to remain there all night. He then emptied the mercury out of the syphon into this vessel, keeping the open end far within it. By this means the short leg of the syphon was filled with very dry air. The other part was nov joined, and boiled mercury put into the bend of the syphon; and the experiment was then prosecuted with mercury which had been recently boiled, and was the same with which the barometer had been careſully filled. The results of the experiments are expressed in the following table. Here it appears again in the clearest manner, that the elasticities do not increase as fast as the densities, and the diſſerences are even greater than in Mr Sulzers experiments. The second table contains the results oſ experimens made on very damp air in a warm summers morning. In these it appears that the elasticities are almost pretisely proportional to the densities+ a small constant quantity, nearly O,11 deviating from this rule chieſly between the densi ties I and 1,5, within which limits we have very nearly D = E 0rm As this air is nearer to the constitution of atmospheric air than the ſormer, this rule may be mſely followed in cases where atmospherie air is concerned, as in measuring the depths of pits by the barometer. The third table shows the compression and elasticity of air strongly impregnated with the vapours of camphire. Here the Boylean law appears pretty exact, or rather the elasticity seems to increase a little faster than the density. Dr Hooke examined the compression of air by immer ing a bottle to great depths in the sea, and weighing the water which got into it without any escape of air. But this method was liable to great uncertainty, on account of the unknown temperature oſ the sea at great depths. Hitherto we have considered only such air as is not rarer than what ve breathe; ve must take a very diſferent method for examining the elasticity oſ rareſied air. Let 2h (Fig. 67.) be a long tube, formed a-top no ⸗ cup, and of sufficient diameter to receive another smaller tube a f, open at first at both endss Let the outer tube and cup be filled with mercury, which will rise in the inner tube to the same level. Let a ſ now be stopped at a. It contains air oſ the same density and elasticity with the adjoining atmospheree. Note exactly the space a b which it occupies. Drav it up into the position of Fig. 68. and let the mereury stand in it at the height d ę, while c e is the height of the mercury in the harometer. It is evident that the column de is in equilibrio between the pressure oſ the atmosphere and the elasticity of the air included in the space a dc. And since the weight of c æ would be in equilibrio with the whole pressure of the atmosphere, the veight oſ cd is equivalent to the elasticity oſ the included air. While thereſore c e is the measure of the elasticity oſf the surrounding atmosphere, c d vill be the measure of the elasticity of the included air; and since the air originally occupied the space a b, and has now expanded into ad, we have it ſor the measure of its density. N. B. cæ and c d are measured by the perpendicular heights of the eolumns, but a b and a d must be measured by their solid capacities. BY raising the inner tube still higher, the mereury will also rise higher, and the included air will expand still farther, and we obtain another c d, and another p and in this manner the relation between the density and elasticity of rarefied air may be discovered. This examination may be managed more ensily by means of the air-pump. Suppose a tube a e (Fig. 69.) containing a small quantity oſ air a b, set up in a cistern of mercury, which is supported in the tube at the height æ b, and let ec be the height of the mercury in the barometer. Let this apparatus be set under a tubulated receiver on the pumpplate, and let n be the pump-gage, and m n be made equal to c e. Then, as has been already shewn, c b is the measure of the elasticity of the air in a b, corresponding to the bulk a b. Nov let some air be abstracted from the receiver. The elasticity oſ the remainder will be diminished by ĩts expansion; and thereſore the mereury in the tube a æ will descend to some point d. For the same reason, the mercury in the gage will rise to some point o, and m o will express the elasticity of the air in the receiver. This would support the mercury in the tube a æ the height eæ, if the space a r were entirely void oſ air. Thereſore r d is the eſfect and measure of the elasticity of the included air when it has expended to the bulk a d; and thus its elasticity, ll under a variety of other bulks, may be compured with ĩs elasticity when of the bulk a . When the air has been far abstracted from the receiver that the mercury in a descends to e, then m o vill be the precise measure of ĩts elasticity. In all these cases it is necessary to compare ĩits bulk a b vith its natural bulk, in which its elasticity balances the pressure oſ the atmosphere. This may be done by layng the tube a æ horizontally, and then the air will collap. into its ordinary bulk. Another easy method may be taken ſor this examination. Let an apparatus a be d e f Fig. 70.) be made, consisting of a horizontal tube a æ of even bore, a ball d ge oſ a large diameter, and a swan-neck tube h ſ. Let the ball and part of the tube ge b be filled with mereury, s0 that the tube may be in the same horizontal plane wih the surface d e of the mercury in the bal. Then seal up the end a, and connect ſ with an air-pump. When the air is abstracted from the surſace d e, the air in a b will expand into a larger bulk a c, and the mercury in the pumpgage vill rise to some distance below the barometrie height It is evident that this distance, without any ſarther calculation, will be the measure of the elasticity of the air presing on the surface d e, and therefore of the air in a c. The most exact of all methods is to suspend in the receiver of an air-pump a glass vessel, having a very narrov mouth over a cistern of mercury, and then abstract the air till the gage rises to some determined height. The diſference è between this height and the barometric height de termines the elasticity of the air in the receiver and in the suspended vesse. Now lower down that vessel by the sli»vire till its mouth is immersed into the mercury, and admit the air into the receiver; it will press the mercury into the little vessel. Lower it still farther down, till the mercury within it is level with that without; then stop ils mouth, take it out and weigh the mercury, and let its 5 weight be w. Subtract this weight ſrom the weight v of the mercury, which would completely ſill the whole vessel; then the natural bulk of the air will be vu, while its bulk, when of the elasticity e in the rarefied receiver, was the bulk or capacity w of the vessel. Its density, therefore, corresponding to this elasticity ,, was jius And thus may the relation between the density and elasticity in all cases be obtained. A great variety oſ experiments to this purpose have been made, with different degrees of attention, according to the interest which the philosophers had in the result. Those made by De Lue, General Roy, Trembley, and Shuckburgh, are by far the most accurate; but they are all confined to very moderate rareſactionss The general result has been, that the elasticity of rarefied air is very nearly proportional to its densit. We cannot say with confidence that any regular deviation from this law has been observed, there being as many observations on one side as on the other; but we think that it is not unworthy the attention of philosophers to determine it with precision in the cases of extreme rareſaction, where the irregularities are most remarkablee The great source of error is a certain adhesive sluggishness of the mereury when the impelling ſorces are very small; and other ſluids can hardly be used, because they either smear the inside oſ the tube and diminish its capacity, or they are converted into vapour, which alters the law of elasticity. Let us, upon the whole, assume the Boylean law, viæ. that the elasticity oſ the air is proportional to its density. The law deviates not in any sensible degree from the truth in those cases which are of the greatest practical importance, that is, vhen the density does not much exceed or fall short of that of ordinary air. Let us now see what information this gives us with respect to the aetion of the particles on each other. Vou. III. 2s The investigation is extremely easy. We have seen that a ſorce eight times greater than the pressure of the atmosphere vill compress common air into the eghth part of its common bulk, and give it eight times its common density: and in this case we know, that the particles are at half their ſormer distance, and that the number which are now acting on the surſace of the piston employed compress them is quadruple of the number which act on ĩt when it is of the common density. Therefore, when this eightfold compressing force is distributed over a ſourfold number of particles, the portion of it which acts on each is double. In like manner, when a compressing ſoræ 27 is employed, the air is compressed into ꝗ; oſ its former bulk, the particles are at3 of their former distance, and the ſorœ is distributed among ꝗ times the number of particles; the force on each is therefore 3 In short, let : be the ditance oſ the particles, the number of them in any given vessel, and therefore the density will be as 7, and the number pressing by their elasticity on its whole internal surface will be as ?. Experiment shows, that the compressing force is as /, which being distributed over the number as æ, will give the ſorce on each as z. Now this forœ is n immediate equilibrium with the elasticity of the particle immediately contiguous to the compressing surſace This elasticity is therefore as æ: and it follows from the nature of perſect fluidity, that the particle adjoining to the conpressing surface presses with an equal force on its adjoiing particles on every sidee Hence we must conclude, that the corpuscular repulsions exerted by the adjoining particles are inversely as their distances from each other, or that the adjoining particles tend to recede from each other vith forces iuversely proportional to their distances. Sir Isanc Newton was the first ho reasoned in this manner from the phenomena. Indeed he was the first who had the patience to refleet on the phenomena with any pre- cision. His discoveries in gravitation naturally gave his thoughts this turn, and he very early hinted his suspicions that all the charateristic phenomena of tangible matter were produced by forces which were exerted by the particles at small and insensible distancess And he considers the phenomena oſ air as affording an excellent example of this investigation, and deducer ſrom them the law which we have now demonstrated; and says, that air consists of particles vhich avoid the adjoining particles with forces inversely proportional to their distances from each other. From this he deduces (in the 2d book of his Principles) several beautiful propositions, determining the mechanical constitution oſ the atmosphere. But it must be noticed that he limits this action to the adjoining particles: and this is a remark of immense consequence, though not attended to by the numerous experimenters vho adopt the lav. It is plain that the particles are supposed to act at a distance, and that this distance is variable, and that the forces diminish as the distances increase. A very ordinary air-pump vill rareſy the air 125 times. The distance of the particles is now five times greater than before; and yet they still repel each other: for air oſ this density vill still support the mercury in a syphon-gage at the height of 0,24, or of an inch; and a better pump will allow this air to expand twice as much, and still leave it elastie. Thus we see that whatever is the distance of the particles of common air, they can act five times farther off. The question comes now to be, Whether in the state of eommon air, they really do act five times farther than the distance oſ the adjoining particles? While the particle a aets on the particle b with the force 5, does it also act on the purtiele c with the force 2,5, on the particle d with the force 1,667, on the particle æ with the foree I,25, on the particle ſ with the ſorce I, on the particle & with the foree 0,8383, &e.? Sir Isaac Newton shows in the plainest manner, that ths is by no means the case; ſor if this were the cae, he make it appear that the sensible phenomena of condensation would be totally different from what we obserree The force necessary for a quadruple condensation would hæ eight times greater, and ſor a nonuple condensation ſæ force must be 27 times greater. Two spheres ſilled vith condensed air must repel each other, and two spheres omtaining air that is rarer than the surrounding air must atract each other, &e. &c. All this ill appear very clely, by applying to air the reasoning which Sir Iaac Newton has employed in deducing the sensible law oſf mutual tendency of two spheres, which consist of particles attcting each other with forces proportional to the square oſ he distance inversely. If we could suppose that the particles of air repelled each other with invariable forees at all distances within some small and insensible limit, this vould produce a compressibility and elasticity similar to vhat we observe. For if we consider a row of particles, within this limit, as compressed by an external force applied to the two extremities, the action of the whole row on the extreme points would be proportional to the number of particles, that is, to their distance inversely and to their density: and a number of such parcels, ranged in a straight line, would constitute a row of any sensible magnitude having the same law oſ compressionn. But this law oſ corpusulr force is unlike every thing we observe in nature, and © the last degree improhable. We must therefore continue the limitation of this mutul repulsion of the particles of air, and be contented ſor the present with having established it as an experimental ſoc, that the adjoining particles of air are kept asunder by forees inversely proportional to their distances; or perhaps it is better to abide by the sensible law, that the density of air is proportional to the compressing force. This lav is abundantly suſficient for explaining all the subordinate pPhenomena, and for giving us a complete knowledge of the mechanical constitution of our atmosphere. And, in the ſirst place, this view oſ the compressibility of the air must give us a very diſferent notion of the height of the atmosphere from what we deduced on a former occasion ſfrom our experiments. It is found, that vhen the air is of the temperature 39 of Fahrenheit's thermometer, and the mercury in the barometer stands at 0 inches, ĩt will descend one-tenth of an inch if we take it to a place 87 ſeet higher. Thereſore, if the air were equally dense and heavy throughout, the height of the atmosphere would be 30 x 10 x 87 feet, or five miles and I00 yardss. But the loose reasoning adduced on that occasion was enough to show us that it must be much higher; because every stratum as ve ascend must be successively rarer as it ĩs less compressed by incumbent weight. Not knowing to what degree air expanded when the compression was diminished, ve could not tell the successive diminutions of density and consequent augmentation of bulk and height; we could only say, that several atmospheric appearances indicated a much greater height. Clouds have been seen much higher; but the phenomenon of the twilight is the most convincing prooſ oſ this There is no doubt that the visibility of the sky or air is owing to its want of perfect transparency, each particle (hether of matter purely aerial or heterogeneous) reſlecting a little light. Let b (Fig. 7.) be the last particle of illuminated air which ean be seen in the horizon by a speetator at A. This must be illuminated by a ray 8 Db, touching the earth's surface at some point D. Nov it is a known fact, that the degree of illumination ealled tuilight is perceived vhen the sun is 15 below the horizon of the spectator, that is, when the angle EòS or ACD is I8 degrees; therefore b C is the secant of nine degrees; it is less, viæ. about 83 degrees, on account of reſraction)) We know the earth's radius to be about 3910 miles: hence we oclude B to be about 45 miles; nay, a very sensible ĩlumination is perceptible much ſarther from the suns pla than this, perhaps twice as far, and the air is suſficently dense ſor refleeting a sensible light at the height oſ nexly 200 miles. We have now seen that air is prodigiously expansible None of our experiments have distinetly shown us any ſ mit. But it does not follow that it is expansible vithout end; nor is this at all Iikely. It is much more prohable that there is a eertain distance oſ the parts in which they no longer repel each other; and this would be the distance at which they would arrange themselves if they were mot heavy. But at the very summit of the atmosphere they vill be a very small matter nearer to each other, on accoum of their gravitation to the earth. Till we know precisely the law of this mutual repulsion, we cannot say what is the height oſ the atmosphere. But if the air be an elastic fluid whose density is alays proportionable to the compressing force, we can tell what is its density at any height above the surſace of the earth: and ve can compare the density so calculated with the density discovered by observation: for this last is measured by the height at which it supports mercury in the barometer. This is the direct measure of the pressure of the external air; and as we know the law oſ gravitation, we can tell what would be the pressure of air having the calculated density in all its parts. Let us therefore suppose a prismatic or cy lindrie colum of air reaching to the top of the atmospheree Let this he divided into an indefinite number of strata of very small and equal depths or thickness; and let us, for greater simplicity, suppose at first that a particle oſ air is of the same veight at all distances from the centre of the earth. The absolute weight oſf any one oſ these strata vill on these conditions he proportional to the number of particles, or the gravity of air contained in it; and since the depth of each stratum is the same, this quantity oſ air will evidently be as the density of the stratum: but the density of any stratum is as the compressing force; that is, as the pressure of the strata above it; that is, as their weight; that is, as their quantity oſ mattetherefore the quantity of air in each stratum is proportional to the quantity of air above it; but the quantity in each stratum is the diſference between the column incumbent on ĩts bottom and on its top: these diſſerences are thereſore proportional to the quantities of which they are the diſferences. But when there is a series of quantities which are proportional to their own diſferences, both the quantities and their diſferences are in continual or geometrical progression: for let a, b, c, be three such quantities that b: ca 2b : b—c, then, by altern. b:ab/c: bc6 and by compos. b: ac : b and a: bb : c thereſore the densities of these strata decrease in a geometrical progression; that is, when the elevations above the centre or surface of the earth inerease, or. their depths under the top of the atmosphere decrease, in an arithmetical progression, the densities decrease in a geometrical progression. Let AR Q (Fig. 72.) represent the section of the earth by a plane through its centre O, and let m O AM be a vertical line, and A E perpendicular to OA will be a horizontal line through A, a point on the earth's surface. Let AE be taken to represent the density oſ the air at A; and let D H, parallel to A E, be taken to A E as the density at D is to the density at A: it is evident, that iſ a logistic or logarithmic curve E H N be drawn, having AN for its axis, and passing through the points E and H, the density of the air at any other point C, in this vertical line, vill be represented by C G, the ordinate to the curve in that point: for it is the property of this curve, that if portions A B, A C, AD, of its axis be taken in arthmetical progression, the ordinates A E, BF, CG, D H, æl be in geometrical progression. It is another fundamental property of this curve, ihat il E Kor H S touch the eurve in E or H, the subtangent AK or DS is a constant quantity. And a third fundamental property is, that the infinitely extended area MAEN is equal⸗ io the rectangle AEL oſ the ordinate and subtangent; and, n like manner, the ares MDHN is equal to SD x DH, or to KA x DH: consequently the area lying beyond any ordinate is proportional to that ordinate. These geometrical properties of this eurve are all analgobis to the chief circumstances in the eonstitution of the atmosphere, on the supposition of equal gravity. The area MCGN represents the whole quantity of aereal matter which is above C: for CG is the density at C, and CD is the thickness oſ the stratum between C and D; and therefore CGHD vill be as the quantity of matter or air in it; and in like manner of all the others, and oſ their sums, or the whole area MCGN: and as each ordinate is proportional to the area above it, so each density, and the quantity of air in each stratum, is proportional to the quatity oſ air above it: and as the whole area MAEN is equal to the rectangle KAEL, s0 the whole air of variable density above A might be contained in a eolumn KA, iſ, instead of being compressed by its ovn weight, it were æithout weight, and compressed by an external force equal to the pressure of the air at the surſace of the earth. In this case, it would be oſ the uniform density AE, which it has ut the surface of the earth, making what we have repeatlilil Lahe homogeneous atmosphere. rive this important circumstance, that the mogeneous atmosphere is the subtangent /hose ordinates are as the densities of the aĩr at diſferent heights, on the suppusition of equal gravity. This eurve may with propriety be called the AT6os PERICAL LOGARITEMIC: and as the diſferent logarithmies aro all characterized by their subtangents, it is of importance to determine this one. It may be done by comparing the densities of mercury and air. For a eolumn of air of uniſorm density, reaching to the top of the homogeneous atmosphere, ĩs in equilibrio vith the mercury in the barometer. Now it is found by the hest experiments, that when mercury and air are oſ the temperature 32 of Fahrenheit's thermometer, ànd the barometer stands at 0 inches, the mercury is nearly 10440 times denser than air. Therefore the height of the homogeneous atmosphere is 10440 times 30 inches, or 26I00 feet, or 8700 yards, or 4850 fathoms, or five miles vanting 100 yards. Or it may be found by observations on the barometer. It is found, that vhen the mercury and air are of the above temperature, and the barometer on the sea-shore stands at 30 inches, if we carry it to a place 884 feet higher it ill fall to 29 inches. Now, in all logarithmic curves having equal ordimates, the portions of the axis intercepted between the eorresponding pairs of ordinates are proportional to the subtangents. And the subtangents of the curve belonging to our common tables is O,4842945, and the difference of the logarithms of 80 and 20 (which is the portion oſ the axis intereepted between the ordinates 80 and 29), or 0,01472338, is to 0,4842045 as 888 is to 26058 feet, or 8686 yards, or 4848 fathoms, or 5 miles wanting 114 yards. This determination is 14 yards less than the other, and it is uncertain which is the most exactt. It is extremely difficult to measure the respective densities of mercury and air; and in measuring the elevation which produces a fall of one inch in the barometer, an error of ,4 of an inch would produce all ſhie difference. We. prefer the last, as depending on ſewer circumstances. But all this investigation proceeds on the suppositio o equal gravity, whereas we know that the veight of a pnticle of air decreases as the square of its distane ſom the centre of the earth increasess. In order, thereſor, ſhat a superior stratum may produce an equal presure a te surface of the earth, it must be denser, because a paricè of it gravitates less. The density, therefore, at equl evations, must be greater than on the supposition of eæ gravity, and the law of diminution of density must be ũiferent. Make OD: OADOA: Od. OC: OAOA: Oe; OB: OA OA: O, & s0 that O d, Oc, Ob, OA, may be reciprocals o OD, 0, OB, OA; and through the points A, b, c, d, drav the perpendiculars AE, b, cę, d b, making them proporũaal to the densities in A, B, C, D: and let us suppæ CD to be exceedingly small, so that the density may be suposed uniſorm through the whole stratum. Thus w hase OD x Od OA?, =OC x Oc and Oc: Od= OD: OC; and Oc: Oc O dæOD: OD—OcC, or Oc: cdOD: DC; and cd: CD=0cf: OD; or, because OC and OD are ultimately in the ratio of qlity, we have cd: CD=Oc: OC OA: OC;, i OA: and cd =CD x OC' and cdxegCDxXcgXũũ OA. but CD x c x OC Is as the pressure at C arising the absolute weight oſ the stratum CD. For this veigh is as the bulk, as the density, and as the gravitatio each particle jointly. Now CD expresses the bulk, cà ie OA; oC density, and the gravitation of each particle. Tha fore, cd x c & is as the pressure on C arising from the weight of the stratum DC; but cd xc g is evidently the element of the curvilineal area A m n E, formed by the curve E fg h n and the ordinates AE, bf, c g, a h, &. m n. Therefore the sum of all the elements, such as cdh g, that is, the area c m n g below c g, vill be as the whole pressure on C, arising from the gravitation of all the air above it; but, by the nature of air, this whole pressure is as the density which it produces, that is, as c  Therefore the curve E g n is of such a nature that the area lying below or beyond any ordinate c  is proportional io that ordinate. This is the property of the logarithmic curve, and E 4n is a logarithmic curve.  But farther, this curve is the same with EGN. For let B continually approach to A, and ultimately coincide vith it. It is evident that the ultimate ratio of BA to Ab, and of BF to b, is that oſ equality; and if EFK, EfEẽ, be drawn, they vill contain equal angles with the ordinate AE, and vill cut off equal subtangents AK, AE. The curves EGN, E g n are therefore the same, but in opposite positions. Lastly, if OA, O, Oc, O d, &e. be taken in arithmetical progression decreasing, their reciprocals OA, OB, OC, OD, &c. will be in harmonical progression increasing, as is well known: but, from the nature of the logarithmice curve, vhen OA, Ob, Oc, Od, &c. are in arithmetical progression, the ordinates AE, b, c g, d h, &e. are in geometrical progressionn. Therefore vhen OA, OB, OC, OD, &e. are in harmonical progression, the densities of the air at A, B, C, D, &c. are in geometrical progression; and thus may the density of the air at all elevations he discovered. Thus to find the density of the air at  the top of the homogeneous atmosphere, make OK: OA  OA: OL, and draw the ordinate LT, LT is the density at K. The celebrated Dr Halley was the first ho observed the relation between the density of the air and the ordinates of the lagarithmic curve, or common logarithms. This he did on the supposition of equal gravity; and his discovery is acknowledged by Sir Isaac Newton, in Princip. ũ. prop. 22. schol. Halley's dissertution on the subject is m No 185. of the Phil. Trans. Newton, with his usual sagacity, extended the same relation to the true state of the œ vwhere gravity is as the square of the distuncæ inversly; and showed that vhen the distances from the earth's eentre are in harmonic progression, the demsities are in geometric progression. He shows indeed, in general, what progres sion of the distance, on any supposition of gravity, vill produce a geometrieal progression of the densities, æ a obtain a set oſ lines OA, Ob, O, Od, &e. which vill logarithms of the densities The subject was afteraris treated in a more familiar manner by Cotes in his Hydrost. Lect. and in his Harmonia Mensururum; also by Ir Brooke Taylor, Meth. Increment; Wolſf in his Aerometria; Herman in his Phoronomia; &e. &e. and lately by Horley, Phil. Trans. tom. Ixiv. We have shown how to determine à priori the density of the air at different elevations above the surface oſ the earth. But the densities may be discovered in all accessible elevations by experiments; numely, by observing the heights oſ the mereury in the barometer. This is a direct measure oſ the pressure of the incumbent atmsphere; and this is proportiònal o the density which it produces. Therefore, by means of the relation subsisting between the densities and the elevations, we can discover the elevations by observations made on the densities by means of the barometer; and thus we may measure elevations by means oſ the barometer; and, with very little trouble, take the level of any extensive tract of eount?y. Of this w6 have an illustrious example in the section which the Abbè Chappe DAuteroche has given of the whole cuntry between Brest and Ekaterinenburgh in Siberia. This is a subject which deserves a minute consideration :. wo shall therefore present it under a very simple and familiar form; and trace the method through its various steps of improvement by De Lue, Roy, Shuekburgh, &e. We have already observed oſtener than once, that if the mercury in the barometer stands at 80 inches, and if the air and mereury be oſ the temperature 89 in Fahrenheit's thermometer, a column of air 87 ſeet thiek has the same weight with a column of mercury 5 oſ an inch thick. Therefſore, if we carry the barometer to a higher place, so that the mercury sinks to 29.9, ve have ascended 87 feet. Now, suppose we carry it still higher, and that the mercury stands at 29.5; it is required to know hat height we have now got to? We have evidently ascended through another stratum oſ equal weight with the former: but it must be of greater thickness, because the air in it is rarer, being less compressedc We may call the density of the first stratum 300, measuring the density by the number of tenths of an inch of mereury which its elasticity proportional to its density enables it to support. For the same reason, the density oſ the second stratum must be 209: but when the weights are equal, the bulks are inversely as the densities; and when the bases oſ the strata are equal, the bulks are as the thicknesses Thereſore, to obtain the thickness oſ this second stratum, say 299: 300  87:87,29; and this ſourth term is the thickness of the second stratum, and ve have ascended in all 174,29 feet. In like manner we may rise till the harometer shows the density to be 208: then ray, 208: 30 æ 87: 857,584 ſor the thickness of the third stratum, and 261,875 or 2617 for the whole ascent; and ve may proceed in the same way for any number of mercurial heights, and make a table of the corresponding elements as ſollows: where the first column is the height of the mercury in the barometer, the second column is the thickness oſ the stratum, or the elevation above the preT ceding station; and the third column is the whole elevation above the first station. Bar. Strat. Elev. 30 00,000 00,000 29,9 87,000 87,000 29,8 57,291 174,291 29,7 87,584 261,875 29,6 87,879 349,754 29,5 88,176 437,980 29,4 8S8,475 526,405 29.3 88,76 615, 181 29,9 89,079 704,260 20.1 59,354 n93, 644 29 59,691 853,335 Having done this, ve can now measure any elevation vithin the limits of our table, in this manner: Observe the barometer at the lower and at the upper stations, and write down the corresponding elevations. Subtract the one from the other, and the remainder is the height requiredc Thus suppose that at the lower station the mereurial height was 29,5, and that at the upper station it was 29,1. 29,1 793, 644 29,8 174,291 619,853  Elevation. We may do the same thing with tolerable accuracy vithout the table, by taking the medium m of the mercurial heights, and their difſference d in tenths of an inch; and then say, as m to 800, so is 7d to the height required 300x8726100d mnn example, m is 294,5, and d is T; and thereſore h 26100 2915 value. h: orhæ Thus, in the foregoing = 620,4, diſfering only one ſoot ſrom the ſormer l Either of these methods is suſficiently aceurate for most purposes, and even in very great elevations vill not produce any error of consequence: the whole error of the elevation 883 feet 4 inches, which is the extent of the above table, is only ĩ of an inch. But we need not confine ourselves to methods of approximation, vhen we have an accurate and scientific method that is equally easyy We have seen that, upon the supposition of equal gravity, the densities of the air are as the ordinates of a logarithmic eurve, having the line of elevations ſor its axis We have also seen that, in the true theory of gravity, if the distances from the centre of the earth inerease in a harmonic progression, the logarithm of the densities vill decrease in an arithmetical progression; but if the greatest elevation above the surface be but a few miles, this harmonic progression will hardly differ from an arithmetical onee Thus, i Ab, Ac, Ad, are l, 2, and 3 miles, we shall find that the corresponding elevations AB, AC, AD are sensibly in arithmetical progression also: for the earth's radius AC is nearly 4000 miles. Hence it : : l l plainly follows, that BCAB is 2000xã00T, or T55030 of a mile, or il of an inch; a quantity quite insignificant. We may therefore aſſirm without hesitation, that in all accessible places, the elevations increase in an arithmetical progression, hile the densities decrease in a geometrical progression. Therefore the ordinates are proportional to the numbers which are taken to measure the densities, and the portions of the axis are proportional to the logarithms of these numbers. It ſollows therefore, that we may take such a scale for measuring the densities that the logarithms of the numbers of this scale shall be the very portions of the axis; that is, of the vertical line in feet, yards, fathoms, or vhat measure we please: and we may, on the other hand, choose such a scale for measuring our elevations, that the logarithms of our scale of densities shall be parts oſ this scale of elevations; and we may find either of these scales scientifieally For it is a known property of the logarithmic curves, that vhen the ordinates are the same, the intercepted portions oſ the abscissæ are proportional to their subtangents. Now we know the subtangent of the atmospherical logarithmic: it is the height of the homogeneous atmosphere in any measure we please, suppose ſathoms: we find this height by comparing the gravities of air and mereury, when hoth are of some determined density. Thus, in the temperature oſ 32 of Fahrenheits thermometer, vhen the barometer stands at 30 inches, it ĩs known (by many experiments) that mercury is 10423, 068 times heavier than air; therefore the height of the balancing column oſ homogeneous air will be 10423, 068 times 30 inches, that is, 4342,945 English ſathoms. Again, it is known that the subtangent of our common logarithmic tables, here 1 is the logarithm of the number 10, is 0, 4342045. Thereſore the number O, 4342045 is to the difference D of the logarithms of any two barometrie heights as 4342, 945 fathoms are to the fathoms F contained in the portion of the axis of the atmospherical logarithmie, which is intereepted between the ordinates equal to these barometrical heights; or that 0,4342945: D 4342,945: F, and 0,43492,945: 4342,945 D: F; hut 0,4842945 is the ten-thousandth part of 43842,945, and therefore D is the ten-thousandth part of F. And thus it happens, by mere chance, that the logarithms of the densities, measured by the inches of mercury which their elasticity supports in the harometer, are just the tenthousandth part of the ſathoms contained in the corresponding portions of the axis of the atmospherical logarithmie. Thereſore, if we multiply our common logarithms by 10000, they will express the ſathoms of the axis of the atmospherical logarithmie; nothing is more easily done. Our logarithims contain what is called the index or characteristic, which is an integer and a number of decimal places. Let us just remove the integer-place four figures to the right hand: thus the logarithm of 60 is 1. 7781518, which is one integer and ſoo Muitiply this by 10,000, 513 and ve obtain S18 ũ 1781,518, or 1m8 T006 The practical application of all this reasoning is obvious and easy: observe the heights of the mercury in the barometer at the upper and lower stations in inches and decimals; take the logarithms of these, and subtract the one from the other: the difference between them (accounting the four first decimal figures as integers) is the difſerence of elevation of fathoms. Example. Mere. Height at the Iower station 29,8.- LAT42168 upper station 29,1., -L.4635930 Diſ. of Log. x 100000-00108,238 or 108 ſathoms and of a ſathom, which is 619,392 ſeet, or 619 feet 47 inches; diſfering from the approximated value formerly found about à an inch. Such is the general nature of the barometric measurement of heights first suggested by Dr Halley; and it has been verified by numberless comparisons of the heights calculated in this vay with the same height measured geometrically. It was indeed in this way that the precise specific gravity of air and mereury was most accurately determined, namely, by observing, that when the temperature of air and mercury was 32, the diſference oſ the logarithms of the mercurial heights were precisely the fathoms of elevation. But it requires many correetions to adjust Vou. III. T this method to the circumstances of the ease; and it v not till very lately that it has been so ſar adjusted to then as to become useful. We are chiefly indebted 1o M. de Luc for the improvementss The great elevations in Suitzerland enabled him to make an immense number of ſœævations, in almost every variety oſ circumstances. Sir Gurꝶ; Shuckburgh also made a great number with most actura instruments in much greater elevations, in the same mutry; and he made many chamber experiments for detemiing the laws of variation in the subordinate circumstanæ General Roy also made many to the same purpose. And b these two gentlemen we are chieſfly obliged ſor the comtions which are now generally adopted. It is easy to perceive, that the method, as alreadj &pressed, cannot apply to every case: it depends on the sæ cific gravity of air and mercury, combined with the supœ sition that this is affected only by a change of praun But since all bodies are expanded by heat, and as ther is no reason to suppose that they are equally expanded by i, it follows that a change of temperature will change the relative gravity of mereury and air, even although hoth sufer the same change of temperature: and since the air nay be warmed or cooled vhen the mercury is not, or may change its temperature independent of it, ve may expect still graer variations of specifie gravity. The general effect of an augmentation of the speciſic ſvity oſ the mereury must be to increase the subtange of the atmospherical logarithmic; in which case the logarihms of the densities, as measured by inches of mereury, vilepress measures that are greater than ſathoms in the sam proportion that the subtangent is increased; or, when the air is more expanded than the mereury,  it vill requie⸗ greater height oſ homogeneous atmosphere to balanc inches of mereury, and a given ſall of mercury vill then correspond Lo a thicker stratum of air. In order, thereſore, to perſect this method, we must lam by experiment how much mercury expands by an increase of temperature; we must also learn how much the air expands by the same, or any change of temperature; and how much its elasticity is affected by it. Both these circumstances must be considered in the case of air; for it might happen that the elasticity of the air is not so much affected by heat as its bulk is. It will, thereſore, be proper to state in this place the experiments which have been made for ascertaining these two expansions. The most accurate, and the best adapted experiments for ascertaining the expansion of mereury, are those of General Roy, published in the 67th volume of the Philosophical Transactions. He exposed 0 inches of mercury, actually supported by the atmosphere in a barometer, in a nice apparatus, by which it could be made of one uniſorm temperature through its whole length; and he noted the expansion of it in decimals of an inch. These are contained in the following table; where the first column expresses the temperature by Fahrenheit's thermometer, the second column expresses the bulk of the mercury, and the third column the expansion of an inch of mercury for an increase of one degree in the adjoining temperatures. TABLE A. Bulk of ; Pemp- Mercury. Expan. ſor 19)] Temp. Mereury. Expan. for 19 30,5117 0, 0000763 102] 30, 22238 0, 0001003 30,4888 0, 0000787 92 30, 1922 0, 0001023 30,4652 0,0000810 /2 30, 1615 0, 0001043 30,4409 0, 0000833 T2 30, 1302 0, 0001063 30,4159 0, 0000857 62 30,0984 0,0001077 30, 3902 0, 0000880 52 30,0661 0, 0001093 30,3638 0, 0000903 42 30,0333 0,00011I0 30,3367 , 0000923 32 50, 0000 0,00011217 30,83090] O, 0000943 22 20,9662 0,0001143 30, 2807 0, 0000963 12 29,9819 0,0001I60 30,2518 O, 0000983 2 29,8971 0,0001177 0 20,8901 This table gives rise to some reſlections. The scale of the thermometer is constructed on the supposition that te successive degrees of heat are measured by equal incre ments oſ bulk in the mercury of the thermometer. How comes it, thereſore, that this is not accompanied by equal increments of bulk in the mercury of the column, but thæ the corresponding expansions of this column do continually diminish ? General Roy attributes this to the gradual d&tachment of elastic matter from the mercury by heat, which presses on the top of the column, and therefore shortens it He applied a hoiling heat to the vacuum a-top, vithout producing any ſarther depression; a prooſ that the barometer had been careſully filled. It had indeed been bled through its whole length. He had attempted to measur the mereurial expansion in the usual way, by filling S0 inche oſ the tube with boiled mercury, and exposing it to the heat with the open end uppermost. But here it is ev dent that the expansion of the tube, and its solid contenis, must be taken into the account. The expansion oſ the tube as found so exceedingly irregular, and so incapsble of being determined with precision for the tubes which were to be employed, that he was obliged to have recourse to the method with the real barometer. In this no regurd was necessary to any cireumstance but the perpendicula height. There vas, besides, a propriety in examining the mercury in the very condition in which it was used ſor menasuring the pressure oſ the atmosphere; because whatever complication there was in the results, it was the same in the barometer in actual use. The most obvious manner of applying these experiments on the expansion oſ mercury to our purpose, is to reduœ the observed height oſ the mercury to what it would have been iſ it were oſ the temperature 32. Thus, suppose that the observed mercurial height is 29,2, and that the temperature of the mercury is 720, make 80, 1302: 302-,2: 29, 0738. This vill be the true measure of the density of the air of the standard temperaturee In order that ve may obtain the exact temperature of the mercury, it ĩs proper that the observation be made by means of a thermometer attached to the barometer-frame, s0 as to varm and cool along vith it. Or this may be done vithout the help of a uble, and with sufficient aceuracy, from the circumstance that the expansion of an inch of mercury for one degree diminishes very nearly 45 part in each suceeding degree. If, therefore, we take from the expansion at 82° its thousandth part for ench degree of any range above it, ve obtain a mean rate of expansion for that range. If the observed temperature o the mereury is below 829, we must add this eorrection to obtain the mean expansion. This rule will be made more exact iſ ve suppose the expansion at  to be  0,0001127. Then multiply the observed mercurial height by this expansion, and. ve obtain the correetion, to be subtracted or added according as the temperature of the mercury as above or below 8. Thus to abide by the former example of 7. This exceeds 89 by 40: therefore take 40 from 0,0001127, and we have 0,0001087 for the medium expansion for that range. Multiply this by 40, and we have the whole expansion of one inch of mereury, / 0,004848. Multiply the inches oſ mercurial height, viæ. 29,2, by this expansion, and ve have for the correction O, 12696; which being subtracted from the observed height leaves 2,07804, differing from the accurate quantity less than the thousandth part oſ an inch. This rule is very easily kept in the memory, and supersedes the use of à table. This correction may be made vith all necessary exactness by a rule still more simple; namely, by multiplying the observed height of the mercury by the difference of its temperature from 82, and cutting off four ciphers before the decimals of the mercurial height. This ill seldom err 1bò of an inch. We even believe that it is the most exæ method within the range of temperatures that can be expected to occur in measuring heights: for it appears, by comparing many experiments and observations, that General Roy's measure of the mercurial expansion is too great, and that the expansion of an inch of mereury between 20 ad 70 of Fahrenheit's thermometer does not exceed O, 000102 per degree. Having thus corrected the observed mercurial heights by reducing them to what they would ha been if the mercury had been of the standard temperature, the logarithms of the corrected heights are taken, and their difference, multiplied by 10000, vill give the difference of elevations in English fathoms. There is another way of applying this correction, ſully more expeditious and equally accurat. The diſferenæ of the logarithms oſ the mercurial heights is the measure oſ the ratio of those heights. In like manner the differenæ oſ the logarithms of the observed and corrected heights at any station is the measure of the ratio of those heights. Therefore this last difference of the logarithms is the mesure of the correction of this fatio. Now the obserred height is to the corrected height nearly as I to I,000102 The logarithm of this ratio, or the difference of the logorithms of I and I,000102, is 0,0000444. This is the crrection ſor each degree that the temperature oſ the mercury differs from 32. Thereſore multiply O, 0O004 by the difference oſ the mercurial temperatures from 32, and the products will be the corrections of the respective logrithms. But there is still an easier vay oſ applying the logarithmic correction. If both the mercurial temperatures ar the same, the differences of their logarithms will be the same, although each may be a good deal above or belov the standard temperature, if the expansion be very nearly equablee. The correction will be necessary only when the temperatures at the two stations are different, and will be 0.0000504 It is also necessary to attend to the temperature of the air; and the change that is produced by heat in its density is oſ much greater consequence than that of the mereury. The relative gravity of the two, on which the subtangent of the logarithmic curve depends, and consequently the unit of our scale of elevations is much more affected by the heat of the air than by the heat oſ the mercury. This adjustment is of incomparably greater difficulty than the former, and we can hardly hope io make it perfeet. We shall narrate the chief experiments vhich have been made on the expansion of air, and deduce from them such rules as appear to be necessary consequences of them, and then notice the circumstances which leave the matter still imperfect. General Roy compared a mercurial and an air thermometer, each of which was graduated arithmetically, that is, the units of the scales were equal bulks of mercury, and equal bulks (perhaps different from the ſormer) of air. He found their progress as in table C. It has been established by many experiments that equal increments of heat produce æqual increments in the bulk of mercury. The diſferences oſ temperature are thereſore expresed by the second column, and may be considered as æqual; and the numbers of the third column must he allowed to express the same temperatures with those oſ the first. They directly express the bulks of the air, and the numbers of the ſourth column express the differences of these bulks These are evidently unequal, and show that common air expands most of all when of the temperature 62 nearly. The next point was to determine what was the actual increase of bulk by some known increase of heatt. For this purpose he took a tube, having a narrow bore, and a ball at one endc. He measured with great care the capacity of both the ball and the tube, and divided the tube into equal spaces which bore a determined proportion to the eapacity of the bal. This apparatus was set in a long cylinder filled with frigoriſic mixtures, or with water, which could be uniformly heated up to the hoiling temperature, and was accompanied by a nice thermometer. The expansion of the air vas measured by means of a column oſ mercury, which rose or sunk in the tubee. The tube being of a small bore, the mercury did not drop out of it; and the hore being chosen as equable as possible, thiẽ column remained of an uniſorm length, whatever part of the tube it chanced to occupy. By this contrivance he was able to examine the expansibility of air of various densities. When the column of mercury contained only a single drop or two, the air vas nearly of the density of the external air. If he wished to examine the expansion of air twice or thrice as dense, he used a column of 80 or 60 inches long: and to examine the expansion of air that is rarer than the external air, he placed the tube with the ball uppermost, the open end coming through a hole in the bottom oſ the vessel containing the mixtures or water. By this position the column of mercury was hanging in the tube, supported by the pressure of the atmosphere; and the elasticity of the included air vas measured by the difference between the suspended column and the common harometer. The ſollowing table contains the expansion of I000 parts of air, nearly of the common density, by heating it from O to 212. The first column contains the height of the barometer; the second contains this height augmented by the small column of mereury in the tube of the manometer, and therefore expresses the density oſ the air examined; the third contains the total expansion of I000 parts; and the fourth contains the expansion ſor I, supposing it uniform throughout. TaBLE D. Mean Hence it appears, that the mean expansion of I000 parts of air, of the density 30,62 by one degree oſ Fahrenheit's thermometer, is 2,384, or that I000 becomes 1002, 284. If this expansion be supposed to follow the same rate that was observed in the comparison of the mercurial and air thermometer, we shall find that the expansion of a thousand parts oſ air for one degree of heat at the different intermediate temperatures will be as in table E. TaBLE E. TanLE F. Total Expansion Temper. Expansion. ſor 1°. 212 484,210 192 412001 500 1m  i0,452] 5ſ 152 359,508] 59 2.2155 I32 815,1938] 25 I?  219.513] 22 92  222,006 2ſ 82ſ Io7,195 22 12 nmę,ęn  28 6 147.0800 50 22  I2ios;  2,6087 21,068  5 5121 42 95,20 9 39 1,718 ] õĩ 22 48,421  n3s⸗ 12 206,088] 5 2,1608 If we would have a mean expansion for any particular range, as between 12° and 99, which is the most likely to comprehend all the geodætical observations, ve need only take the difference oſf the bulks 26,088 and 222,006 / 195,968, and divide this by the interval of temperature 50°, and we obtain 2,4496, or 2,45, for the mean expansion for 10. It would perhaps be better to adapt the table to a mass of I000 parts of air of the standard temperature 32; for in its present form it shows the expansibility of air originally of the temperature 0. This will be done with sufficient accuracy by saying (for 2120) 1071,718: 1484, 210 = 1000,: 18849, and s0 oſ the rest. Thus we shall construet the expansion of 10,000 parts of air as in Table F. This will give for the mean expansion of I000 parts of air between 120 and 92æ2,29. Although it cannot happen that in measuring the diſferences oſ elevation near the earth's surface, we shall have occasion to employ air greatly exceeding the common density, we may insert the experiments made by General Roy on such airss They are expressed in Table G, where lumn fſirst contains the densities measured by the inches oſ mercury that they will support when of the temperature 32; column second is the expansion of IOOO parts of such air by being heated from O to 212; and column third & the mean expansion for I TanLE G. TaBLE H. l Expiu for 212. Density. 451,54 423,28 412,09 439, 87 448, 24 Mean Mean expansion, We have much more frequent occasion to operate in air that is rarer than the ordinary state of the superſicial atmospheree. General Roy accordingly made many experiments on such airss He found in general, that their expansibility by heat was analogous to that of air in its ordinury density, being greatest about the temperature 60. He found, too, that its expansibility by heat diminithed vith its density, but he could not determine the law oſ gradationn. When redueed to about one-fiſth of the density of common air, its expansion was as follows: From this very extensive and judicious range of experiments, it is evident that the expansibility of air by heat is greatest when the air is about its ordinary density, and that in small densities it is greatly diminished. It appears alæ, that the law oſ compression is altered; for in this spedmen of the rare air half of the whole expansion happens about the temperature 99, but in air of ordinary density at 105. This being the case, we see that the experiments of Mr Amontons, narrated in the Memoirs of the Academy at Paris 1702, &e. are not inconsistent with those more perspicuous experiments of General Roy. Amontons found, that vhatever was the density of the air, at least in cases much denser than ordinary air, the change of 1800 of temperature increased its elasticity in the same proportion: for he found, that the column of mercury which it supported, when of the temperature 50, was inereased one- third at the temperature 212. Hence he hastily concluded; that its expansibility was increased in the same proportion; but this by no means follows, unless ve are certain that in every temperature the elasticity is proportional to the density. This is a point which still remains undecided ; and it merits attention, because, if true, it establishes a remarkable lav concerning the action of heat, which would seem to go to prove that the elasticity of fluids is the property of the matter of fire, vhich it superinduces on every body with which it combines in the form of vapour. After this account oſ the expansion of air, we see that the height through which we must rise in order to produce a given ſall of the mercury in the barometer, or the thickness of the stratum of air equiponderant with a tenth of an inch of mercury, must increase with the expansion of air; and that if 3 be the expansion for one degree, ve must multiply the excess of the temperature of the air above 32 by 0,00220, and multiply the product by 87, in order to obtain the thickness of the stratum where the barometer stands at 80 inches; or whatever be the elevation indicated by the difference of the barometrical heights, upon the supposition that the air is of the temperature 89, ve must multiply this by 0,00229 ſor every degree that the air is varmer or eolder than 32. The produet must he added to the elevation in the first case, and subtracted in the latter. m Sir George Shuekburgh deduces O, 00%4 from his exp riments as the mean expansion of air in the ordinry case: and this is probably nearer the truth; because General Roys experiments were made on air which vas freer ſiom damp than the ordinary air in the fields; and it apjpn from his experiments, that a very minute quantity of dam increases its expansibility by heat in a prodigious degræ The great difficulty is how to apply this correction; æ rather, how to determine the temperature of the air in thuæ extensive and deep strata in which the elevations are mæsured. It seldom or never happens that the stratum is of the same temperature throughout. It is commonly nuch colder aloſt; it is also of different constitutions. Beæ it is warm, loaded with vapour, and very expansible; abæ it is cold, much drier, and less expansible, both by its dyness and its rarity. The currents of wind are oſten ſiposed in strata, which long retain their places; and as they come from diſferent regions, are oſ diſferent lemperatures and diſferent constitutionss We cannot thereſore determine the expansion of the whole stratum with precision, and must content ourselves with an approximation: and the best approximation that we can make is, by supposing the whole stratum of a mean temperature bet ween tho of its upper and lover extremity, and employ the expmsn corresponding to that mean temperature. This, however, is founded on a gratuitous suppositim, that the whole intermediate stratum expands alike, m that the expansion is equable in the diſferent intermediate temperatures; but neither oſ these are warranteũ by &periment. Rare air expands less than what is denser; a therefore the general expansion of the whole stratum renders its density more uniſorm Dr Horsley has pointel out some curious consequences of this in Phil. Trans. vl Ixiv. There is a particular elevation at which the g&neral expansion, instead of diminishing the density oſ the qir, increases it by the superior expansion of what is belovi and ve know that the expansion is not equable in the intermediate temperatures; but we cannot find out a rule which vill give us a more accurate correction than by taking the expansion for the mean temperature. When ve have done this, we have carried the method of measuring heights by the barometer as far as it can go; and this source of remaining error makes it needless to attend to some other very minute equations which theory points out. Such is the diminution of the weight of the mercury by the change oſ distance from the centre of the earthh. This accompanies the diminution of the weight of the air, but neither so as to compensate it, nor to go along with it pari passu. Aſter all, there are found cases where there is a regular deviation ſfrom those rules, of which we cannot give any very satisfactory account. Thus it is found, that in the province of Quito in Peru, which is at a great elevation above the surface of the ocean, the heights obtained by these rules fall considerably short oſ the real heights; and at Spitzbergen they considerably exceed them. It appears that the air in the circumpolar regions is denser than the air of the temperate climates vhen of the same heat and under the same pressure; and the contrary seems to be the case vith the air in the torrid zone. It would seem that the speciſic gravity oſ air to mercury is at Spitabergen about I to 10224, and in Peru about I to 13100. This difference is with great probability ascribed to the greater dryness of the circumpolar air. This source of error will alvays remain; and it is combined with another, which should be attended to by all vho practise this method of measuring heights, namely a difference in the speciſic gravity oſ the quicksilver. It is thought suſficiently pure for a barometer when it is cleared of all calcinable matter, so as not to drag or sully the tube. In this state it may contain a eonsiderable portion of other metals, particularly of silver, bismuth, and tin, which will diminish its speciſic gravity. It has been obtained by æ vieation from cinnabar of the speciſic gravity 14,29 and it is thought very fine if 18,65. Sir Georg Shuelburgh found the quicksilver, vhich agreed preqæyy vith the atmospherical observations on which the ruls ue founded, to hãve the specifie gravity 13, GI. It is ældm obtained 50 heavy. It is evident that these varitions vil change the whole results; and that it is absolutely neœ sary, in order to obtain precision, that we know the denily of the mercury employedl. The subtangent of the atmpherical logarithmie, or the height of the homogens amosphere, vill increase in the same proportion viſi the density of the mercury; and the elevation corresp⸗ũis; to ſ5 of an inch of barometric height will change in the same proportion. We must be contented with the remaining imperiætions: and we can readily see, that, for any purp tha can be answered by such measurements of great heights the method is suſficiently exact; but it is quite nalſqute to the purpose of taking accurate levels, for directing te construetion oſ canals, aqueducts, and other works oſ this kind, where extreme precision is absolutely necessr;. We shall now deduce from all that has been said on this subject sets of easy rules for the practice of this m o measurement, illustrating them by an example. 1. M. de Luc's Method. I. Subtract the logarithm of the barometrical height a the upper station from the logarithm of that at the love; and count the index and four first decimal figures of the remainder as ſathoms, the rest as a decimal fraction Cal this the elevation. II. Note the different temperatures of the mercory il the two stations, and the mean temperature. Mulũꝶ the logarithmic expansion corresponding to this meai temperature ſin Table B, p 664.) by the diſference of the wo temperatures, and subtract the produet ſrom the ele- vation if the barometer has been coldest at the upper station, othervise add it. Call the difference or the sum the aꝑproximated elevation. III. Note the difference of the temperatures of the air at the two stations by a detached thermometer, and also the mean temperature and its difference from 82. Multiply this difference by the expansion of air for the mean temperature, and multiply the approximate elevation hy I &/ this product, according as the air is above or below 32°. The product is the correet elevation in ſathoms and decimals. Example. Suppose that the mercury in the barometer at the lower station was at 29,4 inches, that its temperature was 500, and the temperature oſ the air vas 45; and let the height of the mercury at the upper station be 25, 19 inches, its temperature 46, and the temperature of the air 39. Thus ve have . Mercurial Hts. Temp. Merc. Mean. Temp. Air. Mean. 20,4 50 45 25,19 i5' 15 39 ii I. Log. of 29,4 - - - 1.4683478 Log. of 25.19 - - 1.40122852 Elevation in fathoms - - 671,191 II. Expans. for 48 418 Multiply by - 4 J- : 1,892 Approximated elevation - - 669,290 III. Expans. of air at 2 -0,002388 x 4a—82, / IO - 10 0,0238 Vou. IlI. Multiply - - - 669,2990 By - - - - 1,0238 Product æ the correct elevation - 685,228 I l 2. Sir GEORGE SHUCKBURGHS Method. I. Reduce the barometric heights to what they would be if they were of the temperature 32. IL. The difference of the logarithms of the redueed barometrical heights vill give the approximate elevation. III. Correct the approximated elevation as before. Same Example. I. Mean expansion for I ſfrom Table A, p. 659, is 0,000111. 18 x 0,000111 x 29,à - - 0,059 Subtract this from - :- 20,4 Reduced barometric height - - 29,341 Expans. ſrom Table A, p. 659, is 0,00011l. 14 æ 0,00011I x 25,19 - - 0,089 Subtract from - - - 25,190 Reduced barometric height - 25, 151 II. Log. 89,841 - - - 0.4674749 Log. 25,151 - - - 1.4005553 Approximated elevation - 669, 196 TI. This multiplied by I,0238, gives - 685, 125 Remark 1. If 0,000101 be supposed the mean expansion f mercury for 19 as Sir George Shuckburgh determines , the reduetion of the barometric heights will be had suſciently exact by multiplying the observed heights of the mercury by the difference oſ its temperatures ſfrom 32, and cutting oſf four more decimal places; thus 29,4 r gives ſor the reduced height 29,347, and 25, 19 x gives 25, 155, and the diſference of their logarithms gives 669,4 ſathoms for the approximated elevation, which diſfers from the one given above by no more than 15 inches. Remork 2. If 0,0024 be taken for the expansion of air for one degree, the correetion for this expansion will be had by multiplying the approximated elevation by 12, and this product by the sum of the differences oſ the temperatures from 82, counting that diſference as negative when the temperature is below 32, and cutting off four places; thus l . 669,196 x 12 x II  O7 x 76000 = I6,061, which added to 669,196 gives 685,257, diſfering from the former only ꝗ inches. From the same premises we may derive a rule, which is abundantly exact for all geodætical purposes, and which requires no tables of any kind, and is easily remembered. I. The height through which we must rise in order to produce any fall of the mercury in the barometer, ĩs inversely proportional to the density of the air, that is, to the height of the mercury in the barometer. 2. When the barometer stands at 30 inches, and the air and quicksilver are of the temperature 82, we must rise through 87 feet, in order to produce a depression oſ ; of an inch. i S. But if the air be of a different temperature, this S7 ſeet must be increased or diminished by 0,21 of a foot ſor every degree oſ diſference of the temperature ſrom 32°. 4. Every degree of difſerence oſ the temperatures oſ the mereury at the two stations makes a change of 2,883 feet, or 2 ſeet 10 inches in the elevation. Hence the ſollowing rule: 1. Take the difference of the barometric heights in tenths of an inch. Call this d. 2. Muliiply the difference a between S2, and the mean temperature of the air by 21, and take the sum or difſerence of this produet and 87 feet. This is the height through which we must rise to cause the barometer to ſull from 30 inches to 29,9. Call this height A. Let m be the mean between the two barometric heights 80d h Then m Multiply the difference? of the mereurial temperatures by 2,83 feet, and add this product to the approximated elevation if the upper barometer has been the warmest, otherwise subtract it. The result, that is, the sum or diſference, will be the corrected elevation. is the approximated elevation very nearly. Same Example. a = ””4  251,942,1 h=©87+ I0 x 0,21, 59, 204 + 2519 ,  2B,29 Approx. elevation—/ 30 x c - = 4123,24 ſeet. 5 Corr. ſor temp. of mercury, 4 x 2,83 1,32 Corrected elevation in feet - - 4111,92 Ditto in fathoms - - - 685,32 Diſfering from the former only I5 inches. This rule may be expressed by the ſollowing simple and easily-remembered formula, vhere a is the difference between 32 and the mean temperature oſ the air, d is the diſference of barometric heights in tenths of an inch, m is the mean barometric height,? the difference between the mer- curial temperatures, and E is the correet elevation E = 0 E= 30 7 a LWe shall now conclude this subject by an aceount of some of the most remarkable mountains, &e. on the earth, above the surſace oſ the ocean, in feet. Feet. Feet. Mount Puy de Domme in Ben More..... 3870 Auvergne, the first moun- Ben Lawvers... 40l5 tain measured by the ba- Ben Gloo..... B8A7 rometer..... 5197 Shihalliom..... B9I Mount Blanc.. . 15646] Ben Lomond..., 3ISQ0 Monte Rossas.. . 15084 Ben-nevis.... 4380 Aiguille d'Argenture ) Alps 18402] Cairn-gorm... 4080 Monastery of St Ber- Tinto...... IT0 nar]Z..... . ſ544] Table Hill, Cape of Good Mount Cenis.... 5212 Hope...... 8Ia5 Pic de los Reyess... 7620] Gondor City in Abyssinia 8410 Pic du Medi 9300 ] Source of the Nile.. BOS2 Pic d'Ossano Pyrenees 11700  Pie of Teneriffe... 14026 Canegou.. ]... 8B544] Chimboracoo.... 2L440 Lake of Geneva... I9382] Cayambouroo..: I5391 Mount tna.... 10963 Antissna..... I9150 Mount Vesuvius... 3938 Pichinha..... I5670 Mount Hecla in Iceland 4300 City of Quito.... 9917 Snowdown..... 3571 Caspian Sea below the Ocean 306 This last is so singular, that it is necessary to give the authority on which this determination is founded. It is deduced ſrom nine years' observations with the barometer at Astrakan by Mr Lecre, compared with a series oſ observations made vith the same barometer at St Petersburgh. This employment of the barometer has caused it to become a very interesting instrument to the philosopher and to the traveller; and many attempts have been made of late to improve it, and render it more portable The improvements have either been directed to the enlargement of its range, or to the more accurate measurement of its present scalee Of the first kind are Hookes wheel baro- meter, the diagonal barometer, and the horizontal harometer, described in a former volume of this work. In that place are also deseribed two very ingenious contrivances of Mr Rownings, which are evidently not portable Oſ all the barometers with an enlarged scale, the best is that invented by Dr Hooke in 1668, and described in the Phil Trans. No 185. The invention was also claimed by Huyghens and by De la Hire; but Hooke's was published long before. It consists of a compound tube ABCDEFG (Fig. B), of which the parts AB and DE are equally wide, and EFG as much narrover as ve would amplify the scale The parts AB and EG must also be as perfeetly eylindrical a possiblee. The part HBCDI is filled with mercury, having a vacuum above in AB. IF is filled with a light ſluid, and FG vith another light fluid which will not mix with that in IF. The cistern G is of the same diameter as AB. It is ensy to see that the range of the separating surſace at F must he as much greater than that of the surſace I as the area of I is greater than that of F. And this ratio is in our choicee This barometer is free from all the had qualities oſ those formerly described, being most delicately moveable; and is hy far the fittest for a chamber, for amusement, by observations on the changes of the atmospheric pressuree The slightest breeze causes it to rise and fall, and it is continually in motion. But this, and all other contrivances oſ the kind, are inferior to the common barometer for measurement of heights, on account of their bulk and cumbersomeness; nay, they are inferior for all philosophical purposes in point oſf aceuracy; and this ſor a reason that admits of no reply. Their scale must be determined in all its parts by the common barometer; and therefore, notwithstanding their great range, they are susceptible of no greater accuracy than that with which the scale of a common barometer can be observed ind measured. This will be evident to any person who vill take the trouble of considering how the points of their scale must be ascertained. The most accurate method for graduating such a barometer as ve have now described would be to make a mixture oſ vitriolic acid and vater, which should have 5 of the density of mercury. Then, let a long tube stand vertical in this fluid, and conneet its upper end with the open end of the barometer by a piꝶe which has a branch to which ve can apply the mouth. Then if we suck through this pipe, the fluid vill rise both in the barometer and in the other tube; and IO inches rise in this tube will correspond to one inch descent in the common barometer. In this manner may every point of the scale be adjusted in due proportion to the rest. But it still remains to determine what particular point of the seale corresponds to some determined inch of the common barometer. This can only he done by an actual comparison; and this being done, the whole becomes equally accurate. Except therefore for the mere purpose of chamber amusement, in which case the barometer last deseribed has a decided preference, the common barometer is to be preſerred; and our attention should be entirely directed to its improvement and portability. For this purpose it should be furnished with two microscopes, or magniſying glasses, one of them stationed at the begimning of the scale; which should either be movenble, so0 that it may always be brought to the surface of the meroury in the cistern, or the cistern should be so contrived that its surface may always be brought to the beginning of the scalee The glass vill enable us to see the incidence with accuracy. The other microscope must be moveable, so as to be set opposite to the surſuce oſ the mercury in the tube; and the scale should be furnished with a vernier which divides an inch into 1000 parts, and be made oſ materials o? which ve know the expansion with great precision. For an account of many ingenious contrivances to make the instrument accurate, portable, and commodious, consult Magellan, Dissert. de diverses Instr. de Phys.; Phil Trans. Ixvii. Ixviii.; Journ. de Phys. xix. 108. 316. xvi. 392. xvii. 839. xxi. 436. xxii. 90.; Sulæzer, Act. Helvlt. ili. 259.; De Luc, Recherches sur les Modificuiion de ? Atmosphere, ĩ. 40l. ĩi. 459, 490. De Lucs seems the most simple and perfect oſ them al. Cardinal de Luyne (Mem. Par. 1768); De Lue, Recherches,  63.; Vm Swinden's Positiones Physicæ; Com. Acad. Petrop. i; Com. Acad. Petrop. Nov. ii. 200. viii. Tuus ve have given an elementary aceount of the ditinguishing properties of air as a heavy and compresihle fluid, and of the general phenomena which are immedia consequences of these properties. This we have done na set of propositions analogous to those which form the dotrines of hydrostatics. It remains to consider it in another point of view, namely, as moveable and inert. The phe nomena consequent on these properties are exhibited in the velocities which air acquires by pressure, in the resistane vhich bodies meet with to their motion through the air, and in the impression which air in motion gives to bodies exposed to its action. We shall first consider the motions of which air is suceptible when the equilibrium of pressure (whether arising ſrom its weight or ĩts elasticity) is removed; and, in the next place, we shall consider its action on solid bodies eposed to its current, and the resistance which it makes o their motion through it. In this consideration we shall avoid the extreme of ge nerality, which renders the discussion too abstract and diſfieult, and adapt our investigation to the circumstances in which compressible fluids (of which air is taken ſor the re presentative) are most commonly found. We shall consider air thereſore as it is commonly found in accessible stuations, as acted on by equal and parallel gravity; and we shall consider it in the same order in which vater is treated in a system of hydraulies. In that science the leading problem is to determine vith what velocity the water will move through a given orificœ when impelled by some known pressure; and it has been found, that the best form in which this most diſficult and intricate proposition can be put, is to determine the velocity of water ſflowing through this orifice hen impelled by its weĩght alone. Having determined this, we can reduee to this case every question which can be proposed; for, in Place oſ the pressure of any piston or other mover, ve ean always substitute a perpendicular column of water or air whose veight shall be equal to the given pressure. The first problem, therefore, is to determine with what velocity air will rush into a void when impelled by its weight alone This is evidently analogous to the hydraulic problem of vater flowing out of a vessel. And here we must be contented vith referring our readers to the solutions which have been given of that problem, and the demonstration that it flows with the velocity which a heavy body would acquire by falling from a height equal to the depth of the hole under the surſace of the water in the vesse. In whatever way ve attempt to demonstrate that proposition, every step, nay, every word, of the demonstration applies equally to the air, or to any fluid whatever. Or, if our readers should wish to see the connexion or analogy of the cases, we only desire them to recollect an undoubted maxim in the science of motion, that when the moving force and the matter to be moved vary in the same proportion, the velocity will be the sume. Iſ thereſore there be similar vessels of air, water, oil, or any other fluid, all of the height of a homogeneous atmosphere, they vill all run through equal and similar holes with the same velocity; for in whatever proportion the quantity of matter moving through the hole be varied by a variation oſ density, the pressure which forces it out, by acting in circumstances perfectly similar, varies in the same proportion by the same variation of density. We must thereſore assume it as the leading propositn, that air rushes from the atmosphere into a wid æith ii velocity which a heavy body would acquire by fulling from the top of a homogeneous atmosphere. It is known that air is about 840 times lighter than water, and that the pressure oſ the atmosphere supporis m ter at the height of 83 ſeet nearly. The height thereſo: of a homogeneous atmosphere is nearly 38 x 840, or 2Tſ% ſeet. Moreover, to know the velocity acquired by any ſl, recollect that a heavy body by ſalling one foot acquires the velocity oſ 8 feet per second; and that the velocities acquired by ſalling through diſferent heights are as the square roots oſ the heights. Thereſore, to find the velocity corresponding to any height, expressed in feet per second, multiply the square root of the height by 8. We have theæ ſore in the present instance V=/8 V27ẽ90, 6 x 166,433, = 1832 feet per second. This therefore is the velocity with which common air vill rush into a void; and this may be taken as a standard number in pneumatios, as 16 and 82 are standard numbers in the general science oſ mechanies, expressing the action of gravity at the surſace o the earth. It is easy to see that greater precision is not necesary in this matter. The height of a homogeneous atmosphere is a variable thing, depending on the temperature of the an If this reason seems any objection against the use oſ the number 1382, ve may retain 8, H in place of it, where H expresses the height of a homogenecus atmosphere oſ the given temperaturee A variation of the harometer makes no change in the velocity, nor in the height oſ he homogeneous atmosphere, because ĩt is accompanied by a proportional variation in the density of the air. When it is inereased ,l;, for instance, the density is also inereased ſs; and thus the expelling force and the matter to be moved are changed in the same proportion, and the velocity remains the same. N. B. We do not here consider the 5 let V be the velocity of air rushing into a void, and v ©hæ velocity with which it will rush into this rareſied air. It is a theorem in the motion of fluids, that the pressures are as the squares of the velocities of efflux. Thereſor P: P 7?. Hence ve derive 0 / v x3 and v=/VXx l We do not here consider the rsistance which the air of the atmosphere will meet with ſrom the inertia of that in the vessel which it must displace in is motion. Here we see that there vill always be a current ino the vessel while ò is less than D. We also learn the gradual diminution of the velocity a the vessel ſills; for? continually increases, and thereſor 1 continually diminishes. It remains to determine the time ? expressed in seconds, in which the air oſ the atmosphere vill flow into this vessel from its state of vacuity till the air in the vessel has acquired any proposed density 2. For this purpose let H, expressed in feet, be the height through which a heavy hody must fall in order to acquire the velocity V. expressed also in feet per second. This ve shall express more brieſly in future, by calling ĩt the height producing the velocity V. Let C represent the &pacity of the vessel, expressed in cubic feet, and O the area or section of the orifice, expressed in superficial æ square feet; and let the natural density of the air be D. Since the quantity of aerial matter contained in a ves depends on the capacity of the vessel and the density oſ the air jointly, ve may express the air which would fill this vessel by the symbol CD when the air is in its ordinary state, and by C when it has the density . In order to obtain the rate at which it fills, ve must take the fluxion of this quantity C; This is Cà; for C is a constant quantity, and; is a variable or ſlowing quantity. But ve also obtain the rate oſ influx by our knowledge of the velocity, and the area of the orifice, and the density. The velocity is V, or 8/ H, at the first instant, and when the air in the vessel has acquired the density?, that is, at the end of the time ſ, the velocity is 8  H ,/I, or 8 vu /25  o 80 The rate ; influx therefore (Which may be conceived as measured by the little mass of air which will enter during the 8  HOD V D— ſ D 8  HO V D VT/1i, multiplying the velocity by the orifice and by the density. Here then we have two values oſ the rate of influx. By stating them as equal ve have a ſluxionary equation, from which ve may obtain the fluents, that is, the time t in seconds necessary for bringing the air in the vessel to the density 3, or the density ? which will be produced at the end of any time . We have the equation SVHO DVD/?  C3. Hence we derive i s s73; x m Of this the fluent is t time i with this velocity) will be 0u x VD/ + A, in which A is a conditional constant quantity. The condition which determines it is, that ? must be nothing when is nothing, that is, vhen VD23T; for this is evidently the case at the beginning of the motion. Hence it follows, that the constant quantity is V5, and the complete ſluent, suited to the case, is C —— — 7HO D x  D—D—/ The motion ceases hen the air in the vessel has acquired the density of the external air; that is, vhen ſ / D, or vhen t HoD x VD, æ Thereſore the time of completely ſilling the vessel is 47H-5 Let us illustrate this by an example in numbers. Supposing then that air is 840 times lighter than vater, and the height of the homogeneous atmosphere 27720 ſeet, ve have 4, H=666. Let us ſurther suppose the vessel to contain 8 cubie feet, which is nearly a wine hogshead, and that the hole by which the air oſ the ordinary density, which we shall make æI, enters is an inch square, or ;]; of a square foot. Then the time in seconds of completely filling it will bo—F7⸗ or , or 1,7297. If the hole is only ,35 of a square inch, that is, if its side is ;5 of an inch, the time of completely ſilling the hogshead ill be 173' very nearly, or something less than three minutes. If we make the experiment with a hole cut in a thin plate, we shall find the time greater nearly in the proportion of 63 to 100, for reasons obvious to all ho have studied hydraulics. In like manmer we can tell the time necessary for bringing the air in the vessel to  of its ordinary density. The only variable part of our fluent is the co-eſficient—V , or VI. Let 3 be 3, then mimy/ſ=1, and I1/Z9S3; and the time is 863 very nearly when the hole is ; of an inch wide. Let us now suppose that the air in the vessel ABCD Fig. 81.) is compressed by a weight acting on the cover AD, vhich is moveable down the vessel, and ĩs thus expelled into the external air. The immediate effect of this external pressure is  to compress the air and give it another density. The density D density D. This air is in a state oſf compression; md ĩ the compressing force be removed, it will expand, and is elasticity will diminish along with its density. Iis elastict; in any state is measured by the force which Eeeps it in tha state. The force which keeps common air in ĩts ordnar density is the weight of the atmosphere, and is the sa vith the weight of a column of water 38 feet high If therefore we suppose that this air, instead of being confinel by the top of the vessel, is pressed down by a moveabi piston carrying a column of water 83 feet high, its elasicity will balance this pressure as it balances the presur of the atmosphere; and as it is a fluid, and propagate through every part the pressure exerted on any one part, it will press on any little portion of the vessel by its elasticity in the same manner as when loaded with this column. The consequence of this reasoning is, that if this sml portion of the vessel be removed, and thus a passage & made into a void, the air will begin to flow out with the same velocity with which it would flow when impelled by its weight alone, or with the velocity acquired by falling from the top of a homogeneous atmosphere, or 1339 feet in a second nearly. But as soon as some air has come out, the density of the remaining air is diminished, and its elasticity is dimnished; therefore the expelling foree is diminishedl. But the matter to be moved is diminished in the very am proportion, because the density and elasticity are found to vary according to the same law; therefore the velocity will continue the same from the beginning to the end of the eſſlux. This may be seen in another way Let P be the presure oſ the atmosphere, which being the counterbalan and measure of the initial elasticity, is equal to the expeling force at the first instant. Let D be the initial density, and V the initial velocity. Let d be its density at the end of the time t oſ eſilux, and » the contemporaneous velocity. It is plain that at the end of this time we shall have the expelling force - m r for- D: d / P: _ L =V]) These forces are proportional to the quantities of motion which they produce; and the quantities of motion are proportional to the quantities of matter M and m and the veIocities V and v jointly: therefore we have P: u MV: m 5. But the quantities of matter which æscape through a given oriſice are as the densities and velocities jointly; that is, M: m=m DV: d v: therefore P: Pdpv: a⸗ n 2 and P x d ii =P d V, and Vi/c, and V/Vy, and the velocity of eſſlux is constant. Hence follows, what appears very unlikely at first sight, that however much the ãir in the vessel is condensed, it ill always issue into a void vith the same velocity. In order to fiud the quantity of aerial matter which will issue during any time ?, and consequently the density of the remaining air at the end of this time, e must get the rate of eflux. In the element of time? there issues (by what has been said above) the bulk 8HO ? (ſor the velocity V is constant); and therefore the quantity 8,,/HO d ĩ. On the other hand, the quantity oſ air at the beginning was CD, C being the capacity of the vessel; and when the air has acquired the density d, the quantity is Cd, and the quantity run out is CD—QC à: therefore the quantity which has run out in the time ? must be the fluxion of CD—Cd, or CàZ. Therefore we have the equation ci c 8/HOà:  Cã, ad ? = 57° 5750 Vou. III. a2X The fſluent of this is t7 m log. . This fluent must be so taken that t may be/o hen d= n Therefore the correct fluent vill be t/ 5 m log. ã D ſorioꝶ > = log I,o0. We deduce from this, that it requires an infinite time for the whole air oſ a vessel to flow out of it into a void. N. B—By log. d, &e. is meant the hyperbolic logarithm of d, &e. Let us next suppose that the vessel, instead of letting out its æir into a void, emits it into air oſ a less density, which remains constant during the efflux, as ve may suppose to be the case vhen a vessel containing condensed air emits it into the surrounding atmospheree Let the initial density of the air in the vessel be 3, and that oſ the atmospere D. Then it is plain that the expelling force is rLD and that after the time ? it is PD. We have therefore P 2 : Ea_FED = MV: m v,  &D W2: d v'. Whence we derive v2/V . d From this equation we learn that the motion will be at an end when d D: and if ?D there can be no efflux. To find the relation between the time and the density, let H, as before, be the height producing the velocity V. The height producing the velocity of efflux 3 r v must be H x and the little parcel oſf air which vill flo out in the time ? will be/ 8,/HO di  d—I y'/) On the other hand, it is= C⸗ Hence ve deduce the fluxionary equation 7 / r The fluent of this, correct- æd s0 as to make tO when d /,, is — x 3D+VD0 . LL). And the time of letn e time comple ing the efflux, vhen d/D, is t ⸗ x log. :/0 iD Lastly, Let ABCD, CFGH (Fig. 82.) be two vessels containing airs of different densities, and communicating by the orifice C, there will be a current from the vessel containing the denser air into that containing the rarer: suppose from ABCD into CFGH. Let P be the elastic ſoree of the air in ABCD, Q its density, and V its velocity, and D the density of the air in CFGH. And, aſter the time ?, let the density oſ the air in ABCD be q, its velocity v, and the density of the air in CFGH be ?. The expelling force from ABCD vill be P Lilt at the first instant, and at the end of the Q time ? it will be 74 Therefore we shall have : P?P Q E = QV:: qv, which gives v mV x / D and the motion vill cease when  mj. q Let A be the capacity of the first vessel, and B that oſ the second. We have the second equation AQ + BD QqP) +BD A 7+B3, and therefore ? Aps Substituting this value of? in the former value of u, ve have v æ Vx QB D Q ]l, which gives the relation 78Q7D between the velocity u and the density q. In order to ascertain the time when the air in ABCD has acquired the density q, it will be convenient to abridge the work by some substitutions. Thereſore make B+A) æ M, BQD + BQ æN, BQBD æBR and =n Then, proceeding as beſore, we obtain the fluxionary equation 8 VHO4 g 1/ AQ 5 L N ; ; AVR q : =—A vhence t =5HOm- q oſ& vhic the fluent, completed so that ? o when 7 Q, is t A/R Qjm+ (&'mQ); 5H0M  Log —in+ n-) Some of these questions are of difſicult solution, and they are not oſ frequent use in the more important and ual applications of the doctrines of pneumatics, at least in ther present form. The cases of greatest use are when the ar is expelled from a vessel by an external force, as vhen bellows are worked, vhether of the ordinary form or consisting of a cylinder fitted with a moveab lepistonn. This last case merits a particular consideration; and, fortunately, the investigation is extremely easy. Let AD, Fig. 5. be considered as a piston moving downward with the uniform velocity æ, and let the area oſ the piston be n times the area of the hole of efflux, then the velocity of efflux arising from the motion of the piston will be n” Add this to the velocity V produced by the elaticity of the air in the first question, and the whole velæity will be V4n ſ. It will be the same in the otherss. The problem is also freed from the consideration of the time of eſflux. For this depends now on the velocity of the piton. It is still, however, a very intricate problem  æ certain the relation between the time and the density, even though the piston is moving uniformly; for at the beginning of the motion the air is of common density. As the piston descends, it both expels and compresses the air, and the density of the air in the vessel varies in a very intricate manner, as also its resistance or reaction on the piston For this reason, a piston which moves uniformly by means of an external force will never make an uniform blast by suCCessive strokes; it will always be weaker at the heginning of the stroke. The best way for securing an uniform blast is to employ the external force only for lifting up the piston, and then to let the piston descend by its own weight. In this way, it will quickly sink down, compressing the air, tĩll its density and corresponding elasticity exactly balance the veight of the piston. After this the piston will descend equably, and the blast will be uniſorm. These observations and theorems vill serve to determine the initial velocity of the air in all important cases of its expulsion. The philosopher vill learn the rate of its efflux out of one vessæel into another; the chemist will be able to caleulate the quantities of the different gases which are employed in the curious experiments of the ingenious but unfortunate Lavoisier on Combustion, and vill find them extremely different from what he supposed; the engineer vill learn how to proportion the motive ſorce of this machine to the quantity oſ aerial matter which his bellows must supply. But it is not enough, for this purpose, that the air begin to issue in the proper quantity; we must see whether it be not affected by the circumstances of its subsequent passage. All the modifications of motion which are observed in water conduits take place also in the passage of air through pipes and holes of all kindss There is the same diminution of quantity passing through a hole in a thin plate that is observed in waterr. We know that (abating the small efſect of ſriction) water issues with the velocity acquired by ſalling from the surface; and yet if we calculate by this velocity and by the area of the orifice, we shall find the quantity of water deficient nearly in the proportion of 63 to 100. This is owing to the water pressing towards the orifioe from all sides, vhich oceasions a contraction of the jet. The same thing happens in the efflux of air. Also the motion of water is greatly impeded by all contractions of its passage. These oblige it to accelerate its velocity, ad thereſore require an increase of pressure to ſoreæ it through them, and this in proportion to the squares oſ the velocities. Thus, if a machine working a pump causes it  give a certain number of strokes in a minute, it will deliver a determined quantity of vater in that time. Should it hapen that the passage of the water is contracted to one halſ in any part of the machine (a thing which frequently hapens at the valves), the water must move through this otraction with twice the velocity that it has in the rest of te passage. This vill require four times the ſorce no be exerted on the piston. Nay (which vwill appear very odd, and is never suspected by engineers), if no part of the pasage is narrower than the barrel of the pump, but on thæ contrary a part much wider, and if the conduit be agin contracted to the width of the barrel, an additional forœ must be applied to the piston to drive the water through this passage, which would not have been necessary if the passage had not been vwidened in any part. It will require a force equal to the weight of a column of water of the height necessary for communicating a velocity the squaæ of which is equal to the difference oſ the squares of the velocities of the ater in the wide and the narrow part oſ the conduit. The same thing takes place in the motion of air, and therefore all contractions and dilatations must be careſully avoided, vhen we want to preserve the velocity unimpaired. Air also suffers the same retardation in ĩits motion along pipess. By not knowing, or not attending to that, engneers of the first reputation have been prodigiously disappointed in their expectations of the quantity of air which vill be delivered by long pipes. Its extreme mobility and lightness hindered them from suspecting that it would sulfer any sensible retardation. Dr Papin, a most ingenions man, proposed this as the most effectual method oſ trans- ferring the action of a moving power o a great distance. Suppose, for instance, that it was required to raise water out of a mine by a water-machine, and that there was no fall oſ water nearer than a mile's distancee He employed this water to drive a piston, which should compress the air in a cylinder communicating, by a long pipe, with another eylinder at the mouth of the mine. This second cylinder had a piston in it, vhose rod was to give motion to the pumps at the mine. He expected, that as soon as the piston at the water-machine had compressed the air suſficiently, it would cause the air in the cylinder at the mine to force up its piston, and thus work the pumps: Dr Hooke made many objections to the method when laid beſore the Royal Society, and it vas much debated there But dynamics vas at this time an infant science, and very little understoodc. Newton had not then taken any part in the business of the society, otherwise the true objections would not have escaped his sagacious mind. Notwithstanding Papin's great reputation as an engineer and mechanie, he could not bring his scheme into use in England; but afterwards, in France and in Germany, where he settled, he got some persons of great fortunes to employ him in this project; and he erected great machines in Auvergne and Westphalia for draining miness But, so far from being eſfective machines, they would not even begin to move. He attributed the failure to the quantity oſ air in the pipe ol communication, vhich must be condensed hefore it can condense the air in the remote cylinder. This indeed is true, and he should have thought of this earlie. He therefore diminished the size of this pipe, and made his water-machine exhaust instead of condensing, and had no doubt but that the immense velocity with which air rushes into a void would make a rapid and effectual communication of poer. But he vas equally disappointed here, and the machine at the mine stood still as before. Near a century aſter this, a very intelligent engincer at- tempted a much morè ſeasible thing oſ this kind at an irofoundery in Wales. He erected a machine at a poverſul ſall of water, which worked a set of cylinder bellovs, the hlow-pipe oſ which was condueted to fh]ęe distance oſ a nile and a half; where it was applied to à blast furnãcee Bu notwithstunding every care to make ſhe conducting pipe very aĩr-tight, of great size, and 3 smooth æs possible, it would hardly blow out æ candle. The ſailure was aribed to the impossibility of making the pipe æir-tightt But, vhat vas surprising, above ten minutes elupsed aſter the action of the pistons in the bellows beſore the least wind ecould be perceived at ſhe end of the ſipe; whereas the &ginee? expeeted an interval of õ seconds only. No very distinct theory can be delivered on this subjet: but we may derive considerable assistance in understaniing the cãauses of the obstruction to the motion of water in long pipes, by considering what happens to air. The elasticity oſ the ãir, and its great compressibility, have given us the distinetest notions of ſluidity in general, showmg us, in a way that can hardly be controverted, that the parũicles of a fluid are kept at a distance from each other, and from other bodies, by the corpuscular forcess. We shall thereſore take this opportinity to give a view oſ the subjeet, whieh did not oceur to us when treatitig of the motion of water in pipes, reserving a further discussion to the aticles RtvErR, WAPER VORES. The writers on hydrodynamics have always considered the obstruction to the motion of fluids along canals of any Kind, as owing to something like the frietion by which the motion of solid hodies on each other is obstrueted; but we cannot form to ourselves any distinet notion of resemblance, or even analogy, between them. The fact is, however, that a-fluid ruming along a canal has its motion obstrueted; ond that this obstruction is greatest in the immediate vicinity of the solid canal, and gradually diminishes to the middle of the stream. It appears, thereſore, that the paris of ſluids ean no more move among eũch other than among solid bodies, without suffering a diminution of their morion. The parts in physieal contãet with the sides and bottom are retarded hy these immoveable bodies. The particles of the next stratum of ſluid eanmot preserve thei initial velocities without overpassing the purticles of the first stratum; and it appears ſrom the ſaet that they are by this memns retarded. They retard in the same manner the patticles of the thirũ stratum; and  on to the middle stratum or ſhread of ſluid It appeurs from the faot, thereſore, that this sort of ſrietion is not a consequence of rigidity alone, but that it is equally competent to fluids. Nay, since it is a matter of faet in air, and is even more remarkable there than in any other fluid, às we shall see by the experiments which have been made on the subjeet; and as ou? experiments on the compression of air show us the particles of air ten times nearer to each other in some cases than in others (viz. when we see air a thousand times denser in these eases); and therefore force us to acknowledge that they are not in contact; it is plain that this obstruetion has no analogy to friotion, which supposes roughness or inequality of surfacee No sueh inequality can be supposed in the surface of an aerial particle; nor would it be of any service in explaining the obstruction, since the particles do not rub on each other, but pass each other at some small and impereeptible distãnce. We must thereſore have recourse to some other mode of explication. We shall apply this to ãir only in this place; and, since it is proved by the uncontrovertible experiments oſ Canton, Zinimerman, and othets, that water, mercury, vil, &e. are also compressible and perſectly elastic, the argument from this principle, which is conclusive in air, must equally explain the similar phenomenon in hydraulies. The most highly-polished body which we know must be conceived qas having an uneven surface when we compare it vith the small spaces in which the corpuscular forces are exerted; and a quantity of air moving in a polished pipe may be compared to a quantity of small shot sliding down a channel with undulated sides and bottom. The row oſ perticles immediately contiguous to the sides vill therefore have an undulated motion: but this undulation of the contiguous particles of air will not be so great as that of the surface along which they glide; for not only every motion requires force to produce it, but also every change of motion. The purticles oſ air resist this change from a reetilineal to an undulating motion; and, being elastic, that is, repelling each other and other bodies, they keep a little nearer to the surſace as they are passing over an eminence, and their path is less incurvated than the surſace The difference between the motion of the particles of air and the particles of a fluid quite unelastic is, in this respect, somewhat like the difference between the motion of a springcarriage and that of a common carriagge. When the common carriage passes along a road not perſectly smooth, the line deseribed by the centre of gravity of the carriage keeps perfectly parallel to that deseribed by the axis of the wheels, rising and falling along with it. Now let a spring body be put on the same wheels and pass along the same road. When the axis rises over an eminence perhaps half an inch, sinks down again into the next hollow, and then rises a second time, and so on, the centre of gravity of the body describes a much straighter line; for upon the rising of the vheels, the body resists the motion, and compresses the springs, and thus remains lower than it would have been had the springs not been interposed. In like manner, it does not sink so low as the axle does vhen the wheels go into a hollowu. And thus the motion of spring-carriages becomes less violently undulated than the road along which they pass. This illustration will, ve hope, enable the reader to conceive how the deviation oſ the partieles next to the sides and bottom of the canal from a rectilineal motion ĩs less than that oſ the canal itselſ. It is evident that the same reasoning vill prove that the undulation of the next row of particles will be less than that oſ the first, that the undulation of the third row will be less than that oſ the second, and so on, as is represented in Fig. 83. And thus it appears, that while the mass oſ air has a progressive motion along the pipe or canal, each particle is deseribing a waving line, oſ which a Iine parallel to the direction of the canal is the axis, cutting all these undulations. This axis of each undulated path vill be straight or curved as the canal is, and the excursions of the path on each side of its axis will be less and less as the axis of the path is nearer to the axis of the canal. Let us now see what sensible effect this will have; for all the motion which we here speak of is imperceptible. It is demonstrated in mechanics, that if a body moving with any velocity be deflected from its rectilineal path by a curved and perfectly smooth channel, to which the rectilineal path is a tangent, it will proceed along this channel with undiminished velocity. Now the path, in the present case, may be considered as perfectly smooth, since the particles do not touch it. It is one of the undulations which we are considering, and wve may at present conceive this as without any subordinate inequalitiess There should not, therefore, be any diminution of the velocity. Let us grant this of the absolute velocity of the particle; but what we observe is the velocity of the mass, and we judge of it perhaps by the motion of a feather carried along by it. Let us suppose a single atom to be a sensible object, and let us attend to two such particles, one at the side, and the other in the middle: although we cannot perceive the undulations of these particles during their progressive motions, we see the progressive motions themselves. Let us suppose then that the middle particle has moved without any undulation whatever, and that it has advanced ten feet. The lateral particle will also have moved ten feet; but this has not been in a straight line. It will not be so far advanced, thereſore, in the direction of the canal; it will be leſt behind, and will appear to us to have been retarded in its motion: and in like mamer each thread of partieles will be more and more retarded (apparently only) as it recedes ſarther from the axis oſ the canal, or what is usually called the thread of the stream. And thus the observed fact is shown to be a necessary consequence of vhat we know to be the nature of a compressible or elastic fluid; and that without supposing any diminution in the real velocity of each particle, there ill be a diminution of the velocity of the sensible threads of the general stream, and a diminution of the whole quantity of air hich passes along it during a given time. Let us now suppose a parcel of air impelled along a pipe, which is perfectly smooth, out of a larger vessel, and issuing ſrom this pipe with a certain velocity. It requires a certain foree to change iĩts velocity in the vessel to the greater velocity which it has in the pipe. This is abundantly demonstratedl. How long soever we suppose this pipe, there will be no change in the velocity, or in the force, to keep it up. But let us suppose, that about the middle of this pipe there is a part of it which has suddenly got an undulated surſace, however impereeptible Let us further suppose that the final velocity of the middle thread is the same as beforee In this case, it is evident that the sum- total of the motions of all the particles is greater than before, because the absolute motions of the lateral particles is greater than that of the central partiele, which we suppose the same as before This absolute increase of motion cannot be without an increase of propelling force: the force acting now, thereſore, must be greater than the force acting formerly. Thereſore, if only the former force had continued to act, the same motion of the central partiele could not have been preserved, or the progressive motion of the whole stream must be diminished. And thus we sęœ that this internal insensible undulatory motion bocomes a real obstruction to the sensible motion which we ohserve, and occasions an expense of power. Let us see what will be the consequence of extending this obstructing surface ſurther along the canal. It must evidently be accompanied by an augmentation of the motion produced, if the central velocity be still kept up; for the particles which are now in contact with the sides do not continue to occupy that situation: the middle particles moving ſaster ſorward get over them, and in their turn come next the side; and as they are really moving equally fast, but not in the direction into which they are now to be forced, force is necessary for changing the direction also; and this is in addition to the force necessary for producing the undulations so minutely treated of. The consequence of this must be, that an additional force will be necessary for preserving a given progressive motion in a longer obstructing pipe, and that the motion produced in a pipe of greater length by a given force will be less than in a shorter one, and the efflux will be diminished. There is another consideration which must have an influence heree Nothing is more irreſragably demonstrated than the necessity of an additional force for producing an efflux through any contraction, even though it should be succeeded by a dilatation oſ the passage. Now both the inequalities of the sides and the undulations of the motions of each particle are equivalent to à succession of contractions and dilatations; although each of these is next to infinitely small; their number is also next to infinitely great, and thereſore the total effect may be sensible. We have hitherto supposed that the absolute velocity of the particles was not diminished: this we did, having assumed that the interval of each undulation of the sides was vithout inequalities. But this was gratuitous: it was also gratuitous that the sides were only undulatedl. We have no reason for excluding angular asperities. These ill produce, and most certainly often produce, real diminutions in the velocity of the contiguous particles; and this must extend to the very axis of the canal, and produce a diminution of the sum total of motion: and in order to preserve the same sensible progressive motion, a greater force must be employed. This is all that can be mea nt by saying that there is a resistance to the motion of air through long pipes. There remains another cause of diminution, viz. the want oſ perfect fluidity, whether arising from the dissemination of solid particles in a real ſluid, or from the viscidity oſ the fluid. We shall not insist on this at present, because it cannot be shown to obtain in air, at least in any case vwhich deserves consideration. It seems of no importance to determine the motion of air hurrying along with it soot or dust. The effect of fogs on a particular modifieation of the motion of air will be considered under the article SouND. What has been said on this subject is suſficient for our purpose, as explaining the prodigious and unexpected obstruetion to the passage of air through long and narrow pipess. We are able to colleet an important maxim from it, viz. that all pipes of communication should be made as vide as circumstances vill permit: for it is plain that the obstruction depends on the internal surſace, and the force to overcome it must be in proportion to the mass of matter which is in motion. The first increases as the diameter of the pipe, and the last as the squaree The obstruction must therefore bear a greater proportion to the whole motion in a small pipe than in a large one. It were very desirable to know the lav by which the retardation extends from the axis to the sides of the canal, and the proportion which subsists between the lengths of canal and the forces necessary for overcoming the obstruetions when the velocity is given; as also, whether the proportion oſ the obstruction to the whole motion varies with the velocity: but all this is unknown. It does not, how- / ever, seem a desperate case in air: we know pretty distinetly the law of action among its particles, vi. that their mutual repulsions are inversely as their distances. This promises to enable us to trace the progress of undulation from the sides of the canal to the axis. We can see that the retardations will not increase so fast as the square of the velocity. Were the fluid incompressible, so that the undulatory path of a particle were invariable, the deflecting forces by which each individual particle is made to describe its undulating path would be precisely such as arise from the path itself and the motion in it; for each particle would be in the situation of a body moving along a fixed path. But in a very compressible fluid, such as air, each particle may be considered as a solitary body, actuated by a projectile and a transverse force, arising from the action of the adjoining particles. Its motion must depend on the adjustment of these ſorces, in the same manner as the elliptical motion of a planet depends on the adjustment oſ the force of projection, vith a gravitation inversely proportional to the square of the distance from the focus. The transverse ſorce in the present case has its origin in the pressure on the air which is propelling it along the pipe: this, by squeezing the particles together, brings their mutual repulsion into action. Now it is the property of a perfect fluid, that a pressure exerted on any part of it is propagated equally through the whole fluid; therefore the transverse forces which are excited by this pressure are proportional to the pressure itself: and ve know that the pressures exerted on the surface of a fluid, so0 as to expel it through any orifice, or along any canal, are proportional to the squares of the velocities vhich they produce. Thereſore, in every point of the undulatory motion of any particle, the transverse force by vhich it is deflected into a curve is proportional to the square of its velocity. When this is the case, a body would continue to describe the same curve as beſore; but, by the o very compression, the curvatures are increasel, suppoiꝶ ihem to remain simila. This would require m inœææ of the transverse forces; but this is not to be foud; theæ fore the particle will not desribe a similar curv, hut ome which is less incurvated in all its parts; consequei; he progressive velocity of the whole, which is the only iing perceivable by us, vill not be 30 much diminished: hati the obstructions will not inorease so ſast as ſhey æud otherise do, or as the squares of the velociſies This reasoning is equally applicable to all fluids ad s ubundantly confirmed by experiments in hydnuſœ, a shall see when considering the motion of rivers. We han taken this opportunity oſ delivering our notion u hi subject: because, as we have oſten said, it is in the iœꝶ ed discrete constitution of air that we see most disinals the operation of those natural powers whioh constiu fluidity in general. We would beg leave to mention a form of expinen for discovering the law oſ retardation with considnble æcuracy. Experiments have been made on pipes mi ;miM. Bossut, in his Hydrodynamique, has ge à naty beautiſul set made on pipes of an nch and t7o ĩdus ĩimeter, and 200 feet long: but although these exprnnò are very instructive, they do not give us any rule by vi we can extend the result to pipes of greater lengih different diameters. Let a smooth cylinder be set upright in a very iꝶ vosel or pond, and be movesble round its axis: letitæ: turned round by means of a wheel and pulley, with a mform motion and determined velocity. It will exen i⸗ same force on the contiguous water whioh mould be esesæd on it by water turning round it with the same loſ;ſ: and as this water would have its motion gradually ed by the fixed oylinder, 50 the moving oylinder æill &dually communicate motion to the surrounding æãter We should observe the water gradually dragged ound by Iii and the vortex would extend further and further from it as the motion is continued, and the velocities of the parts of the vortex will be less and less as we recede from the axis Now, ve apprehend, that when a point of the surfuce of the cylinder has moved over 200 ſeet, the motion of the vater at different distances from it will be similar and proportional to, if not precisely the same vith, the retardations oſ water flowing 200 feet at the same distance from the side of a canal: at any rate, the two are susceptible oſ an accurate comparison, and the law of retardation may be accurately deduced from observations made on the motions of this vortex. Air in motion is a very familiar object of observation; and it is interesting. In all languages it has got a name; we call it wind: and it is only upon reflection that we consider air as wind in a quiescent state:. Many persons hardly know what is meant hen air is mentioned; but they cannot refuse that the hlast from a bellows is the expulsion oſ vhat they contained; and thus they learn that wind is air in motion. It is of consequence to know the velocity of wind; but no good and unexceptionable method has been contrived for this purpose. The best seems to be by measuring the space passed over by the shadow of a cloud; but this ĩs extremely fallacious. In the first place, it is certain, that although we suppose that the cloud has the velocity of the air in which it is carried along, this is not an exact measure of the current on the surſace of the earth; we may be almost certain that it is greater: ſor air, like all other fluids, is retarded by the sides and bottom oſ the channel in which it moves. But, in the next place, it is very gratuitous to suppose, that the velocity of the cloud is the velocity of the stratum of air between the cloud and the earth; we are almost certain that it is not. It is abundantly proved by Dr Hutton of Edinburgh, that clouds are always formed when two parcels oſ air of diſferent temperatures mix together, each containing a proper quantity of vapour in the Vou. III. Y state of chemical solutionn. We know that diſferent sm⸗ oſ air will frequently flow in different directions ſor a long time. In 1781, while a great fleet rendeævousũ n Leith Roads during the Dutch var, there was a brisk esterly vind ſor about five weeks; and, during the last ſortught oſ this period, there was a brisk westerly eument at ſæ height oſ about ĩ of a milee This was distinctly indiested by frequent ſleecy elouds at a great distance above a liv stratum of these clouds, vhich were driving all this im from the eastward. A gentleman who was at the siege of Quebec in 1759, informed us, that one day vhile thee blew a gale from the west, so hard that the ships al uchor in the river were obliged to strike their topmasis, md it vas vith the utmost diſficulty that some well-manned hni could row against it, carrying some artillery stores o a p above the town, several shells vere thrown ſrom the toin to destroy the boats: one oſ the shells burst in ſhe air ne the top oſ its flight, which was about halſ a nile high The smoke of this homb remained in the same sl ſr above a quarter of an hour, like a great round hll, n gradually dissipated by diſfusion, without removing naty yards from its place When, thereſore, two strata oſ ar come ſrom diſferent quarters, and' one of them ſions orr the other, it will be only in the contiguous surſacs ha : precipitation of vapour vill be made. This vill fom: thin fleeey cloud; and it will have a velocity and direcu vhich neither belongs to the upper nor to the lower utum of air vhich produced it. Should one of thes sni come from the east and the other ſrom the west vith velocities, the eloud formed hetween them will have no mtion at all; should one come ſrom the east, anũ the olhes from the norih, the cloud vill move from the norihe vith a greater velocity than either of the strata. So unæ tain then is the information given hy the clouds either o the velocity or the direetion of the wind. A thiek umit from a furnace vill give us a mueh less equivocal neæ and this, combined with the effects of the wind in inp- Iing bodies, or deſtecting a loaded plane ſrom the perpendicular, or other effects of ſhis kind, may give us measures of the different currents of wind with a precision suſficient for all pructical uses. The celebrated enginee? Mr Johin Smeaton has given, in the 5lst volume of the Philosophical Transactions, the velocities of wind corresponding to the usual denominations in our language. These are founded on a great number of observations made by himselſ m the course of his pracſiee in erecting wind-millss They are contained in the following table: Miles Feet Feet E E ĩ ur. stoni. Nomes nbursctond. Nomes. y 8 3 ſtã; } sums ęat. 3 4no jLight ain. 0 380 i 5” a5 66,01 ſ Hord gile. 5 ©.ã8 ſ Breese. 50O 73.35 10 IS67 6 88,02 j StormBrist gale- , i l 5 m 80 II7.36 ſ Hurricane, tearing up 20 : trees, overturning 2 3c1ſ Fresh gale 16 ĩ5;0  uũting æ⸗ See also some valuable experiments by him on this subject, Philosophieal Transactions 1760 and 1761. One of the most ingenious and convenient methods for measuring the velocity of the wind ĩs to employ its pressure in supporting a column of vater, in the same vay as Mr Pitot measures the velocity oſ a current of waterr. We believe that it was first proposed by Dr James Lynd of Windsor, a gentleman eminent ſor his great knowledge in all the branches of natural science, and ſor his ingenuity in every matter of experiment or practical application. His anemometer (as these instruments are called) consists of a glass tube of the form ABCD (Fig. 84.) open at both ends, and having the branch AB at right angles to the branch CD. This tube contains a few inches of water or any fluid (the lighter the better); it is held with the part CD upright, and AB horizontal and in the direetion of the wind; that is, with the mouth A fronting the wind. The wind acts in the way oſ pressure on the air in AB compresses it, and causes it to press on the surſace oſ th liquor; forcing it down to F, while ĩt rises to E in the other leg. The velocity of the wind is coneluded from the difference E  between the heights of the liquor in the lege As the wind does not generally blow with uniform velcity, the liquor is apt to dance in the tube, and render the observation diſficult and uncertain: to remedy this, it is proper to contract very much the communieation at C between the two legs. If the tube has half an inch of diameter (and it should not have less), a hole oſ;; of an inch is large enough; indeed the hole can hardly be too small, nor the tubes too large. This instrument is extremely ingenious, and wi mdoubtedly give the proportions oſ the velocities of diſferent currents with the greatest precision; for in whatever way the pressure of wind is produced by its motion, we are certain that the difſerent pressures are as the squares oſ the velocities: if, therefore, we can obtain one certain measure oſ the velocity of the wind, and observe the degree to which the pressure produced by it raises the liquor, we can at all other times observe the pressures and compute the relocities from them, making proper allowances for the temperature and the height of the mercury in the barometer; because ſhe velocity will be in the subduplicate ratio of the density of the air inversely when the pressure is the same. It is usually concluded, that the velocity of the wind is that which would be acquired by falling from a heigt which is to Ef as the weight of water is to that of an equal bulk of air. Thus, supposing air to be 40 times lighter than water, and that Efis 5 of an inch, the velocity vill be about 63 feet per second, which is that of a very hard gale, approaching to a storm. Hence we see by the bye, that the scale of this instrument is extremely short, and that it would be a great improvement oſ it to make the leg CD not perpendicular, but very much sloping: or perhap the following form oſ the instrument will give it all the perfection of which it is capable Let the horizontal branch AB (Fig. 85.) be contracted at B, and continued horizontally for several inches BG of a much smaller bore, and then turned down for two or three inches GC, and then upwards with a wide bore. To use the instrument, hold it with the part DC perpendicular; and (having sheltered the mouth A from the wind) pour in water at D till it advances along GB to the point B, which is made the beginning of the scale; the water in the upright branch standing at ſ in the same horizontal line with BG. Now, turn the mouth A to the wind; the air in AB vill be compressed, and vill force the water along BG to F, and cause it to rise from 7 to E; and the range  E vill be to the range BF on the scale as the section of the tube BG to that of CD. Thus, if the width of DC be à an inch, and that of BG3, we shall have 25 inches in the scale for one inch of real pressure E~. But it has not been demonstrated in a very satisfactory manner, that the velocity of the wind is that acquired by falling through the height of a column of air whose weight is equal to that of the column of water EſX Experiments made vith Pitot's tube in currents of water show that several corrections are necessary for concluding the velocity of the current from the elevations in the tube: these corrections may however be made, and safely applied to the present case; and then the instrument will enable us to conelude the velocity of the wind immediately, without any fundamental comparison of the elevation, with a velocity actually determined upon other principles. The chieſ use vhich we have for this information is in our employment of wind as an impelling power, by which we can actuate machinery or navigate ships. These are very important applications of pneumatical doctrines, and merit a particular consideration; and this naturally brings us to the last part of our subject, viz. the consideration of the impulse of air on hodies exposed to its action, and the resistance which it opposes to the passage of bodies through it. This is a subject oſ the greatest importance; heing the foundation of that art which has done the greatest houu to the ingenuity of man, and the greatest servioe to huna society, by connecting together the most distant inhabitants of this globe, and making a communication of hene fits which would othervise have been impossible; ve mem the art of Navigation or Seamanship. Of all the machine which human art has constructed, a ship is not only the greatest and most magniſicent, but also the most ingenious and intricate; and the clever seaman possesses a knovledge founded on the most difficult and abstruse doetrines oſ mechanics The seaman probably cannot give any accunt of his own science; and he possesses it rather by a ind of intuition than by any process of reasoning: but the suecess and efficacy of all the mechanism of this complicated engine, and the propriety of all the manœuvres which the seaman practises, depend on the invariable laws oſ mechanics; and a thorough knowledge of these would enable an intelligent person not only to understand the machine and the manner of working it, but to improve both. Unfortunately this is a subject of very great diſficulty: and although it has employed the genius of Newton, and he has considered it with great care, and his folloers ha added more to his labours on this subject than on any other, it still remains in a very imperſfect state. A minute discussion of this subject cannot thereſore he expected in a work like this; ve must conten? ourselve vith sueh a general statement of the most approved dotrine on the subject as shall enable our readers io coneœivæ it distinetly, and judge vith intelligenee and conſidence of the practical deduetions which may be made from it. It is evidently a branch of the general theory oſ the inpulse and resistance oſ fluids, which should have heen treated of under the article HYDrAULICS, but was then de- ferred till the mechanical properties oſ compressible fluids should also be considered. It was thought very reasonable to suppose that the cireumstances oſ elasticity would introduce the same changes in the impulse and resistance of fluids that it does in solid bodies. It would greatly divert the attention from the distinetive properties of air, if ve should in this place enter on this subjeot, which is both extensive and diſficult. We reckon it better therefore to take the whole together: this we shall do under the article REsisTaNCE or FLuiDS, and conſine ourselves at present to what relates to the impulse and resistance of air alone; anticipating a few oſ the general propositions of that theory, but without demonstration, in order to understand the applications which may be made of it. Suppose then a plane surſace, oſf which a C (Fig. 56.) is the seetion, exposed to the action of a stream of wind blowing in the direction QC, perpendicular to a C. The motion of the wind will be obstrueted, and the surſace a C pressed forvard. And as all impulse or pressure ĩs exerted in a direction perpendieular to the surface, and is resisted in the opposite direction, the surface will be impelled in the direetion CD, the continuation of QU. And as the mutual actions of hodies depend on their relative motions, the force acting on the surface a C vill be the same, iſ we shall suppose the air at rest, and the surfuee moving equally swiſt in the opposite directionn. The resistance oſ the air to the motion of the body will be equal to the impulse of the air in the former case. Thus resistance and impulse are equal and contrary. If the air be moving twice as fast, its particles vill give a double impulse; but in this case a double number oſ particles will exert their impulse in the same time: the impulse will thereſore be fourfold, and in general ĩt will be as the square oſ the velocity: or if the air and body be both in motion, the impulse and resistance will be proportional to the square of the relative velocity. This ĩs the first proposition on the subject, and it appears very consonant to reason. There will thereſore be m analogy between the ſorce of the airs impulse or the nsistance of a body, and the weight of a column of àr icumbent on the surface: for it is a principle in the aũm oſ fluids, that the heights of the columns oſ fluid are a the squares of the velocities hich their pressures prodiæ Accordingly the second proposition is, that the abxiute impulse of a stream of air, blowing perpendicularly on ay surface, is equal to the weight of a column of air which ha that surface ſor its base, and for its height the sm through which a body must fall in order to acquire the ælocity of the air. Thirdly, Suppose the surface AC equal to a C no lge to be perpendicular to the stream of air, but inclined 0ĩt in the angle ACD, which we shall call the angie of inodence; then, by the resolution of forces, it follows, that the action of each particle is diminished in the proportim of radius to the sine of the angle oſ incidence, or of AC to AL, AL being perpendicular to CD. Again: Drav AK parallel to CD. It is plain that o air lying farther from CD than KA is will strike the ple. The quantity of impulse therefore is diminished stil ſuther in the proportion of a C to KC, or of AC  AL. Therefore, on the whole, the absolute impulse is dininised in the proportion of AC? to AL?: hence the propstion, that the impulse and resistance oſ a given surſace se in the proportion of the square of the sine of the angle of incidence. Fourthly, This impulse is in the direction PL, perperdicular to the impelled surface, and the surface tends b move in this direction: but suppose it moveable only in some other direction PO, or that it is in the direction PO that we wish to employ this impulse, its action is thereſor oblique; and if we wish to know the intensity of the npulse in this direction, it must be diminished still further in the proportion of radius to the cosine of the angle LP I or sme of CPO. Hence the general proposition: The effective impulse is as the surface, as the square of the velocity of the wind, as the square of the sine of the angle of incidence, and as the sine of obliquity jointly, which we may express by the symbol R =S.V- sin*. I. sin. O; and as the impulse depends on the density of the impelling fluid, we may take in every circumstance by the equation R æSDV sin. ?I 5in. O. If the impulse be estimated in the direction of the stream, the angle of obliquity ACD is the same with the angle of incidence, and the impulse in this direction is as the surface, as the square of the velocity, and as the cube of the angle of incidence jointly. It evidently follows from these premises, that if ACA be a wedge, of which the base AA' ĩs perpendicular to the wind, and the angle ACA' bisected by its direction, the direct or perpendicular impulse on the base is to the oblique impulse on the sides as radius to the square of the sine of half the angle ACA. The same must be affirmed oſ a pyramid or cone ACA, of which the axis is in the direction of the wind. IF ACA (Fig. 87.) represent the section of a solid produced by the revolution of a curve line APC round the axis CD, vhich lies in the direction of the wind, the impulse on this body may be compared with the direct impulse on its base, or the resistance to the motion of this body through the air may be compared with the direct resistance of its base, by resolving its surface into elementary planes P , which are coincident with a tangent plane PR, and comparing the impulse on P» vith the direct impulse on the corresponding part X  of the base. In this way it follows that the impulse on a sphere is one half oſ the impulse on its great circle, or on the base oſ a eylinder of equal diameter. We shall conclude this sketch of the doctrine with a very important proposition to determine the most advantageous position of a plane surface, hen required to move in one direction while it is impelled by the wind hlowing in a diſferent direction. Thus, Let AB (Fig. 86.) be the sail of a ship, CA the direction in which the wind blows, and AD the line oſ the ship's course. It is required to place the yard AC in such a position that the impulse of the wind upon the sail may have the greatest effect possible in impelling the ship along AD. illẽ llE: Let AB, Ab, be two positions of the sail very near hest position, but on opposite sides of it. Drav BE, bæ perpendicular to CA, and BF, bſ, perpendicular to AD, calling AB radius; it is evident that BE, BF, are the sines of impulse and obliquity, and that the eſfective impulse is BE? x BF, or b x b This must he a maximum. Let the points B, b, continually approach and ultimately ooincide; the chord b B vill ultimately coincide with a straight line CBD touching the circle in B; the triangles CBE, c be are similar, as also the triangles DBF, D bſ: thereſore BE?: h BC; b c, and BF: bf//DBD:  D; and BE?  BF: bè x bf / CB X BD: c  x bD. Therefore when AB is in the best position, s0 that BE? æ BF is greater than bèè x b ſ, we shall have CB  BD greater than C/P x4I, or c B x BD is also a maximumm This we know to he the ease vhen CB æ 2BD; thereſore the sail must be 50 placed that the tangent of the angle of incidence shall be double oſ the tangent of the angle of the sail and keel In a common vind-mill the angle CAD is necessarily a right angle; for the sail moves in a circle to which the vind is perpendicular: thereforæ the best angle oſ the sail and axle æill be 5444 nearly. Such is the theory of the resistance and impulse of the air. It is extremely simple and of easy application. In all physical theories there are assumptions which depend on other principles, and those on Ihe judgment of the naturalist; so that it is always proper to confront the theory vith experiment. There are even cireumstances in the present case which have not been attended to in the theory. When a stream of air is obstructed by a solid body, or when æ solid body moves along in air, the air is condensed beſore ĩt and rarefied behind. There is thereſore a pressure on the anterior parts arising from this want of equilibrium in the elasticity of the air. This must be superadded to the force arising from the impetus or inertia oſ the air. We camot tell with precision what may be the amount of this condensation; it depends on the velocity with which any condensation diffuses itself. Also, if the motion be so rapid that the pressure of the atmosphere cannot make the air immediately ocoupy the place quitted by the body, it will sustain this pressure on its forepart to be added to the other forces. Experiments on this subject are by no means numerous; at least such experiments as can be depended on for the foundation oſ any practical application. The first that have this character are those published by Mr Robins, in 1742, in his Treatise on Gunnery. They were repeated with some additions by the Chevalier Borda, and some account of them published in the Memoirs of the Academy of Sciences in 1763. In the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, vol. LXXIII. there are some experiments of the same kind on a larger scale by Mr Edgeworth. These were all made in the way described in our account of Mr Robins's improvements in gunnery. Bodies were made to move with determined velocities, and the resistances were measured by veights. In all these experiments the resistances were found very exactly in the proportion of the squares of the velocities; but they were found considerably greater than the weight of the column of air, whose height would produce the velocity in a falling hbody. Mr Robinss experiments on a square of 16 inches, describing 25,2 feet per second, indicate the resistance to be to this weight nearly as 4 to S. Bordãàs experiments on the same surſace state the disproportion still greater. The resistances are found not to be in the proportion of the surſaces, but increase considerably faster. Surfaces of 9, 16, 36, and 81 inches, moving with one velocity, had resistances in the proportion oſ ꝗ, 174, 423, and 1043. Now as this deviation ſrom the proportion of the surſaces increases with great regularity, it is most probable that it continues to increase in surfaces of still greater extent; and these are the most generally to be met with in practice in the action of wind on ships and mills. Borda's experiments on 81 inches show that the impulse of wind moving one foot per second is about 45 of a pound on a square foot. Therefore to find the impulse on a ſoot corresponding to any velocity, divide the square of the velocity by 500, and we obtain the impulse in pounds. Mr Rouse oſ Leicestershire made many experiments, vhich are mentioned vwith great approbation by Mr Smeaton. His great sagacity and experience in the erection of windmills oblige us to pay a considerable deference to his judgment. These experiments confirm our opinion, that the impulses increase ſaster than the surfaces. The following table was calculated from Mr Rouse's observations, and may be considered as pretty near the truth. nr ros vomãs  àFœ Foſn Foumds 0 0,000 80 14,635 10 0,29- 90 18,526 20 0,915 100 29”,872 30 2,059 110 n615 40 3,660 120 32,996 50 5,18 180 36, 654 60 8,234 140 44,830 7 1,:: 150 51,462 Iſ we multiply the square of the velocity in feet by I6, the produet will be the impulse or resistance on a square foot in grains, according to Mr Rouses numbers. The greatest deviation from the theory occurs in the oblique impulses. Mr Robins compared the resistance of a vedge, vhose angle was 900, with the resistance of its base; and instead oſ finding it less in the proportion of ẽ to l, as determined by the theory, he found it greater in the proportion of 55 to õ8 nearly; and when he formed the body into a pyramid, of which the sides had the same sũrſace and the same inclination as the sides of the vedge, the resistance oſ the base and face were now as 55 to 39 nearly: so that here the same surface with the same inelination had its resistance reduced from GS to 39 by being put into this ſform. Similar deviations occur in the experiments oſ the Chevalier Borda; and it may be collected from both, that the resistances diminish more nearly in the proportion of the sines oſ incidence than in the proportion of the squares of those sines. The irregularity in the resistance of curved surfaces is as great as in plane surfaces. In general, the theory gives the oblique impulses on plane surfaces much too small, and the impulses on curved surſaces too great. The resistance of a sphere does not exceed the fourth part of the resistance of its great circle, instead of being its half; but the anomaly is such as to leave hardly any room for calculation. It would be very desirable to have the experiments on this subject repeated in a greater variety of cases, and on larger surfaces, so that the errors of the experiments may be of less consequence. Till this matter be reduced to some rule, the art of working ships must remain very imperſect, as must also the construction of wind-mills. The case in which we are most interested in the knowledge of the resistance of the air is the motion of bullets and shells Writers on artillery have long been sensible of the great effect of the air's resistance. It seems to have been this consideration that chieſly engaged Sir Isanc Newton to consider the motions oſ bodies in a resisting medium. A pròposition or two would have sufficed for showing the incompatibility of the planetary motions with the supposition that the celestial spaces were filled with a fluid matter; but he has with great solicitude considered the motion oſ a body projected on the surface of the earth, and its deviation from the parabolic track assigned by Galileoo. He has bestowed more pains on this problem than any other in his whole work; and his investigation has pointed out almost ill the improvements which have been made in the application of mathematical knowledge to the study of nature. Novhere does his sagacity and fertility of resouree appear in s0 strong a light as in the second hook of the Principio, which is almost wholly occupied by this problem. The celebrated mathematician John Bernouilli engaged in it as the finest opportunity of displaying his superiorit A mistake committed by Newton in his attempt to a solution was matter of triumph to him; and the whole of his performance, though a piece of elegant and elaborate geometry, is greatly hurt by his continually bringing this mistake (which is a mere triſle) into viev. The difficulty of the subject is so great, that subsequent mathematicians seem to huve kept alooſ from it; and it has been entirely overlooked by the many voluminous writers ho have treated professedly on military projectiles. They huve spoken indeed of the resistance of the air as afſecting the flight of shot, but have saved themselves from the task of investigating this effect (a task to whieh they were unequal), by supposing that it was not so great as to render their theories and prãctieal deduetions very erroneouss. Mr Robins was the first who seriously examined the subject. He showed, that even the Newtonian theory (vhich had been corrected, but not in the smallest degree improved or extended in its principles) was suſficient to show that the path oſ a cannon-hall eould not resemble a purabola. Even this theory showed that the resistance was more than eight times the weight of the ball, and should produce a greater deviation from the parabola than the parabola deviated from a straight line. This simple but singular observation vas a suolg prooſ how ſaulty the professed writers on artillery had been, in rather amusing themselves with elegant but useless applications of easy geometry, than in endeavouring to give their readers àny useſul inſormationn. He added, that the difference between the ranges by the Newtonian theory and by experiment were so great, that the resistance of the air must be vastly superior to what that theory supposed. It was this vhich suggested to him the necessity of experiments to ascertain this point. We hiave seen the result of these experiments in moderate velocities; and that they were suſficient for calling the whole theory in question, or at least for rendering it useless. It becume necessary thereſore to settle every point by means of a direct experiment. Here was a great difficulty How shull we measure either these great velocities which are observed in the motions of cannon-shot, or the resistances which these enormous velocities ocoasion? Mr Robins had the ingenuity to do both. The method which he took for measuring the velocity of a musket- ball was quite original; and it was susceptibie of great accuracyg We have alrendy given some aceoumt of it in vol. i. p. 194. Having gained this point, the other was not diſſicult. In the moderate velocities he had determined ſhę resistances by the forces whieh balanced them, the weiglhits which kept the resisted hoty in a state of uniform motion. In the great velocities, he proposed to determine the resistances by their immediate effects, by the retardations which they occasioned This was to be done by first ascertuining the velocity of the ball, and then measuring its velocity aſter it had passed through a certain quantity of ai. The diſference of these velocities is the retardation, and the proper measure of the resistance; for, by the initiul and final velocities of the ball, we learn m the time which was employed in passing through tis i vith the medium velocity. In this time the urs m ance diminished the velocity by a certain quantit;. Conpare this ith the velocity which a body projete ũly upwards would lose in the same time by the resii o gravity. The two forces must be in the proportion of ẽr eſfects. Thus we learn the proportion of the ress o the air to the weight of the ball. It is indeed true, u the time oſ passing through this space ĩs not accurately had by taking the arithmetical medium of the iitial and ſinal velocities, nor does the resistance deduced ſon this calilation accurately correspond to this mean vlety; hut both may be accurately found by the experimen by ry troublesome computation, as is shown in the 5th md fib propositions of the second book of Newtons Princſii The diſference between the quantities thus ſoud ad tho: deduced from the simple process is quite triſin nd ſi vithin the limits of accuracy attainable in experiments of this kind; it may thereſore be saſely neglectel Mr Robins made many experiments on this subjet; but unfortunately he has published only a very ſes, s æ vere suſficient for aseertaining the point he had i ner He intended a regular work on the subject, in rtich te gradual variations of resistance corresponding to difers velocities should all be determined by experiment: hub vas then nevly engaged in an important and laborious & ployment, as chief engineer to the East India Compsſ in whose service he went out to India, where he died s less than two years. It is to be regretted that no persi has prosecuted these experiments. It would he neithu &borious nor diſficult, and would add more the impro ii ment of artillery than any thing that has been done so Mr Robinss death, if we except the prosecution of his &periments on the initial velocities of cannoꝶsi by Charles Hutton, royal professor at the Woolvish A my. It is to be hoped that this gentlema, ar b vith such eſfect and success extended Mr Robinss experiments on the initial velocities of musket. shot to cannon, will take up this other subject, and thus give the art of artillery all the scientific foundations which it can receive in the present state of our mathematical knowledge. Till then ve must content ourselves with the practical rules which Robins has deduced ſrom his own experiments. As he has not given us the mode of deduetion, we must compare the results with experiments. He has indeed given a very extensive comparison with the numerous experiments made both in Britain and on the contment; and the agreement is very greatt. His learned commentator Euler has been at no pains to investigate these rules, and has employed himself chiefly in detecting errors, most of which are supposed, because he takes ſor a finished work what Mr Robins only gives to the public as a hasty but useful sketch of a new and very difficult branch of science. The general result of Robin?s experiments on the retardation of musket. shot is, that although in moderate velocities, the resistance is so nearly in the duplicate proportion of the velocities that we cannot observe any deviation, yet in velocities exceeding 200 feet per second the retardations increase ſaster, and the deviation from this rate increases rapidly with the velocit. He ascribes this to the eauses already mentioned, viz. the condensation of the æir before the ball and to the rarefaction behind, in consequence of the air not immediately occupying the space leſt by the bullett. This increase is so great, that if the resistance to a ball moving vith the velocity of 1700 ſeet in a second be computed on the supposition that the resistance observed in moderate velocities is inereased in the duplicate ratio oſ the velocity, it will be found hardly one-third part of its real quantity. He ſound, for instance, that a ball moving through 1670 feet in a second lost about 125 ſeet per second of its velocity in passing through 50 feet oſ air. Vou. III. 2Z This it must have done in the ; of a second, n vhih time it would have lost one foot if projected diretly upwards; ſrom which it appears that the resistance was aboui 125 times its weight, and more than three times græ than if it had increased ſrom the resistancę in small velœties in the duplicate ratio oſ the velocities. He relatæ other experiments which show similar results. But he also mentions a singular circumstance, that tl the velocities exeeed 1100 feet per second, the resistance increase pretty regularly, in a ratio exceeding the duplicate ratio oſ the velocities; but that in greater velocities the re sistances become suddenly triple of what 1hey would have been, even according to this law of increase. He thinks this explicable by the vacuum which is then left behind the ball, it being well known that air rushes into a vacuum vith the velocity of 1132 feet per second nearly. Mr Euler controverts this conclusion, as inconsistent with that gradation which is observed in all the operations oſ nature; and says, that although the vacuum is not produced in smaller velocities than this, the air behind the ball must he s0 rare (the space being but imperfectly filled), that the Pressure on the anterior part of the ball must gradually ap-proximate to that pressure which an absolute vacuum would produce; but this is like his other criticisms. Robins does no where assert that this sudden change of resistance happens in the transition of the velocity from 1182 feet to that of 1131 feet II inches or the like, but only that it is very sudden and very great. It may be strictly demonstrated, that such a change must happen in a narrow enough limit of velocities to justify the appellation of sudden: a similar fact may be observed in the motion of a solid through vater. If it be gradually accelerated, the water will he found nearly to ſill up its place, till the velocity arrives at a certain magnitude, corresponding to the immersion of the body in the water; and then the smallest augmentation of iis motion immediately produces a void behind it, into which the water rushes in a violent manner, and is dashed into froth. A gentleman, who has had many opportunities for such observations, assures us, that when standing near the line of direction of a canmon discharging a ball with a large allotment of powder, so that the initial velocity certainly exceeded 1100 feet per second, he always ohserved a very sudden diminution of the noise which the bullet made during its passage Although the ball was coming towards him, and thereſore its noise, if equable, would be continually imereasing, he observed that it was loudest at first. That this continued for a second or two, and suddenly diminished, changing to a sound vhich was not only weaker, but differed in kind, and gradually inereased as the bullet approached him. He said, that the first noise was like the hissing of red-hot iron in water, and that the subsequent noise rather resembled a hazy whistling Such a change of sound is a necessary consequence of the different agitation of the air in the two cases. We know also, that air rushing into a void, as vhen we break an exhausted bottle, makes a report like a musket. Mr Robinę's assertion therefore has every argument for its truth that the nature of the thing will admit. But ve are not leſt to this vague reasoning: his experiments show us this diminution of resistance. It clearly appears from them, that in a velocity of 1700 ſeet the resistance is more than three times the resistance determined by the theory vhich he supposes the common one. When the velocity was 1065 feet, the actual resistance was ĩ of the theoretical; and when the velocity was 400 feet, the actual resistance vas about 4 of the theoretica. That he assumed a theory of resistance which gave them all too small, is oſ no consequence in the present argument. Mr Robins, in summing up the results of his observations on this subject, gives a rule very easily remembered Mr Robins's correction is only a sagacious approximation. If we suppose the velocity 3613 feet, a very possible thing, the resistance by this formula is infinite, which cannot be. We may even suppose that the resistance given by the formula is near the truth only in such velocities as do not greatly exceed 1700 feet per second. No military projectile exceeds 2200, and it is great ſolly to make it so great, because it is reduced to 1700 almost in an instant, by the enormous resistance. : The resistance to other balls will he made by taking them in the duplicate ratio of the diameters. It has been already observed, that the first mathematicians of Europe have lately employed themselves in improving this theory of the motion of bodies in a resisting medium; but their discussions are such as few artillerists can understand. The problem can only be solved by approximation, and this by the quadrature of very complicated curves. They have not been able therefore to deduce from them any practical rules of easy application, and have been obliged to compute tables suited to different cases. Of these performances, that of the Chevalier Borda, in the Memoirs of the Academy of Sciences in 1769, seems the best adapted to military readers, and the tables are undoubtedly of considerable use; but ĩt is not too much to say, that the simple rules of Mr Robins are of as much service, and are more easily remembered: besides, it must be observed, that the nature of military service does not give room for the application of any very precise rule. The only advantage that we can derive ſrom a perfect theory would be an improvement in the construetion of pieces of ordnance, and a more judicious appropriation of certain velocities to certain purposess. The service of a gun or mortar must always be regulated by the eye. There is another motion of which air and other elastic fluids are susceptible, viz. an internal vibration oſ their particles, or undulation, by which any extended portion ol air is distributed into alternate paurcels of condensed and rarefied air, vhich are continually changing their conũition without changing their places By this change the ondensation which is produeed in one purt of the air is gædually transſerred along the mass of air to the greatest distances in all directions Tt is of importance to have some distinet conception of this motion. It is found to be by this means that distant bodies produce in us the sensation of sound. Sir Isaac Newton treated this subject with his accustomed ingenuity, and has given us a theory oſ it in the end of the second book of his Principia. This theory has been objected to with respect to the conduct oſ the argument, and other explanations have been given by the most eminent mathematicianss. Though they appear b differ ſrom Newton's, their results are precisely the same; but, on a close examination, they differ no more than John Bernouillis theorem oſ centripetal forces differs from Newton's, viz. the one being expressed by geometry, and the other by literal analysiss. The celebrated De la Grange reduces Nevwton's investigation to a tautologieal proposition or identical equation; but Mr Young of Trinity College, Dublin, has, by a different turn of expression, freed Newton's method from this objection. But since Newton published this theory oſ aerial undulations, and of their propagation along the air, and sinœ the theory has been so corrected and improved as to be ceived by the most accurate philosophers as a branch of natural philosophy susceptible of rigid demonstration, ĩt has been ſreely resorted to by many writers on other parts of natural science, vho did not profess to be mathematicians, but made use of it for explaining phenomena in their own line on the authority oſ the mathematicians themselves Learning from them that this vibration, and the quaquoversum propagation of the pulses, were the necessary pro- perties oſ an elastic fluid, and that the rapidity of this propagation had a certain assignable proportion to the elasticity and density of the fluid, they freely made use of these concessions, and have introduced elastic vibrating fluids in-  many facts, vhere others would suspect no such thing, and have attempted to explain by their means many abstruse phenomena of naturee Ethers are everywhere introduced, endued vith great elasticity and tenuity. Vibrations and pulses are supposed in this ether, and these are offered as explanations The doetrines of animal spirits and nervous ſluids, and the whole mechanical system of Hartley, by which the operations oſ the soul are said to be explained, have their foundation in this theory oſ aerial undulations. If these fancied fluids, and their internal vibrations, really operate in the phenomena aseribed to them, any explanation that can be given of the phenomena from this principle must be nothing else than showing that the legitimate consequences of these undulations are similar to the phenomena; or, if we are no more able to see this last step than in the case of sound (which we know to be one consequence of the aerial undulations, although we cannot tell how), we must be able to point out, as in the ease of sound, certain constant relations between the general laws oſ these undulations and the general laws of the phenomena. It is only in this way that we think ourselves entitled to say that the aerial undulations are causes, though not the only causes, of sound; and iĩt is because there is no such relation, but, on the contrary, a total dissimilarity, to be observed between the laws of elastic undulations and the laws of the propagation of light, that we assert with confidence that ethereal undulations are not the causes of vision. Explanations of this kind suppose, thereſore, in the first place, that the philosopher who proposes them understands precisely the nature of these undulations; in the next place, that he makes his reader sensible of those circum- stances oſ them which are concerned in the effect o he &plained; and, in the third place, that he makes the reader understand how this circumstance of the vibrating fiuid is connected with the phenomenon, either by showig it be ils mechanical cause, as when the philosopher explãm the resounding of a musical chord to a flute or pipe which gave the same tone; or by showing that this circumstanæ of the undulation always accompanies the phenomenon, a vhen the philosopher shows that 238 vibrations oſ air in a second, in whatever manner or by whatever cause they are produced, always are followed by the sensation of the tone C in the middle of the harpsichord. But here ve must observe, that, with the exceptim of Euler's unsuccessſul attempt to explain the optical phenomena by the undulations of ether, ve have met with m explanation of natural phenomena, by means of elastic and vibrating fluids, where the author has 50 much as attempied any one of these three things, so indispensably requisite in a logical explanation They have talked of vibrations vithout describing them, or giving the reader the least notion of what kind they are; and in no instance that we can recollect have they showed how such vibrations could have any influence in the phenomenon. Indeed, by not describing with precision the undulations, they were freed from the task of showing them to be mechanical causes oſ the phenomenon; and when any of them show any analogy between the general laws of elastic undulations and the general laws of the phenomenon, the analogy is so vague, indistinet, or partial, that no person of common prudenæ would receive it as argument in any case in which he vas much interested. We think it our duty to remonstrate against this slovenly way of writing: ve would even hold it up to reprobetion. It has been chieſly on this faithless ſoundation that the blind vanity of men has raised that degrading system of opinions called MATERIALISM, by which the affections and fſaculties of the soul of man have been resolved into vibrations and pulses of ether. We also think it our duty to give some account of this motion of elastic fluids. It must be such an account as shall be understood by those who are not mathematicians, because those only are in danger of being misled by the improper application of them:. Mathematical discussion is, however, unavoidable in a subjeet purely mathematical; but we shall introduce nothing that may not be easily understood or confided in; and we trust that mathematical readers will excuse us for a mode of reasoning which appears to them lax ant inelegant. l The fſirst thing incumbent on us is to show how elastic fluids differ from the unelastic in the propagation of any agitation of their parts When a long tube is filled with water, and any one part oſ it pushed out of its place, the whole is instantly moved like a solid mass. But this is not the case with air. If a door be suddenly shut, the vwindow at the farther end of a long and close room will rattle; but some time vill elapse between the shutting of the door and the motion of the window. If some light dust be lying on a braced drum, and another be violently beat at a little distance from it, an attentive ohserver vill see the dust dance up from the parchment; but this will be at the instant he hears the sound of the stroke on the other drum, and a sensible time aſter the strokee Many such familiar ſacts show that the agitation is gradually communicated along the air; and therefore that when one particle is agitated by any sensible motion, a finite time, however small, must elapse beſore the adjoining particle is agitated in the same manner. This would not be the case in vater if water be perfectly incompressiblee We think that this may be made intelligible with very little trouble. Aa BD C D Let A, B, C, D, &e. be a row of aerial particles, at such distances that their elasticity just balances the pressure o the atmosphere; and let us suppose (as is dedudble from the observed density of air being proportional to the compressing force) that the elasticity of the particles, by hich they keep each other at a distance, is as their distances nversely. Let us farther suppose that the particle A ha been carried, with an uniform motion, to a by some extænal force. It is evident that B cannot remain in its present state; for being now nearer to a than to C, iĩt is propelled towards C by the excess oſ the elasticity of A above the natural elasticity of C. Let E be the natural elasticity of the particles, or the force corresponding to the distance BC or BA, and let F be the foree which impels B towards C, and let  be the force exerted by A when at . We have E: f/Ba: BC, æBa: BA; md E: 7E=Ba: BABa =Ba: A-; or E: FBua: Aa. Nov, in Fig. 89. let ABC be the line joining three particles, to which drawv FG, PH parallel, and IAF, HBG perpendicular. Take IF or HG to represent the elasticity corresponding to the distance AB. Let the particle A be supposed to have been carried with an uniform motion o a by some external force, and drav Ra M perpendicular to RG, and make FI: RM æB a: BA We shall then have FI: PM  Ba: Aa; and PM vill represent the force vith which the particle B is urged towards C. Suppose this construetion to he made for every point oſ the lin AB, and that a point M is thus determined for each of them, mathematicians know that all these points M lie in the curve of a hyperbola, of which FG and GH are the asymptotes. It is also known by the elements of mechanics, that since the motion of A along AB is uniform A a or IP may be taken to represent the time of describing A a; and that the area IPM represents the whole velocity which B has acquired in its motion towards C when A has come ſo v PNEUMATICS. 31 a, the force urging B being always as the portion PM of the ordinate. : Take GX of any length in HG produced, and let GX represent the velocity which the uniform action of the natural elasticity IF could communicate to the particle B during the time that A would uniformly deseribe AB. Make GX to GY as the rectangle IFPGH to the hyperbolic space IFRM, and drawv YS cutting MR produced in S, and drav FX cutting MR in T. It is known to the mathematicians that the point S is in a curve line FSs called the logorithmic curve; of which the leading property is, that any line RS parallel to GXis to GX as the rectangle IFGH is to the hyperbolic space IFRM, and that FX touches the curve in F. This being the case, it is plain, that hecause RT increases in the same proportion with FR, or with the rectangle IFRP, and RS increases in the proportion of the space IFRM, TS increases in the proportion of the space IPM. Therefore TS is proportional to the velocity oſ B when A has reached a, and RT is proportional to the velocity which the uniform action of the natural elasticity would communicate to B in the same time. Then since FT is as the time, and TS is as the velocity, the aren FTS vill be as the space deseribed by B (urged by the variable force PM); while A, urged by the external force, deseribes Aa; and the triangle FRT vill represent the space which the uniform action of the natural elasticity would cause B to deseribe in the same time. And thus it is plain that these three motions can he compared together: the uniform motion of the agitated particle A, the uniformly accelerated motion which the natural elasticity would communicate to B by its constant action, and the motion produced in B by the agitation of A. But this comparison, requiring the quadrature of the hyperbola and logarithmic curve, would lead us into most inſrieate and tedious computations. Of these we need only give the result, and make some other comparisons whc are palpable. Let A a be supposed indefinitely small in comparisn of AB. The space described by A is therefore indeſinitely small; but in this case we know that the ratio of the sæ FRT to the rectangle IPRP is indefinitely smal. Theæ is therefore no comparison between the agitation of A by the external force, and the agitation which natural elastcity would produce on a single particle in the same time, the last being incomparably smaller than the first And this space FRT is incomparably greater than FTS; and therefore the spuce which B would describe by the uniform action of the natural elasticity is inoomparably greater than what it would describe in consequence of the agitation of A From this reasoning we see evidently that A must sensibly moved, or a finite or measurable time must elapæ before B acquires a measurable motion. In like manner B must move during a measurable time before C acquires a measurable motion, &c.; and thereſore the agitation of A is communicated to the distant particles in gradual sucœssion. By a ſarther comparison of these spaces we learn the time in which each succeeding particle acquires the very agitation of A. If the particles B and C only are considered, and the motion of C neglected, it will be found that B ha acquired the motion of A a little before it has described] of the space described by A; but if the motion of C h considered, the acceleration of B must be increased by the retreat of C, and B must describe a greater space in prportion to that described by A By computation it apears, that when both B and C have acquired the velocity of A; B has described nearly à of A's motion, and C more nearly 3. Extending this to D, we shall find that D has ibed still more nearly  of As motionn. And from the computation it appears that this approximaon rapidly: therefore, supposing it aceurate from T he very first particle, it follows from the equable motion f A, that each succeeding particle moves through an equal pace in acquiring the motion of A. The conclusion which we must draw from all this is, that vhen the agitation of A has been fully communicated to a article at a sensible distance, the intervening particles, all noving forward with a common velocity, are equally compressed as to sense, except a very few of the first particles; ind that this communication, or this propagation of the oriZinal agitation, goes on with an uniform velocity. These computations need not be attended to by such as Io not wish for an aceurate knowledge of the precise agiation of each particle It is enough for such readers to ee clearly that time must escape bet ween the agitation of A and that of a distant particle; and this is abundantly manifest from the incomparability (excuse the term) of the nascent rectangle IFRP with the nascent triangle FRT, and the incomparability of PRT vith FTS. What has now been shown of the communieation of any sensible motion A a must hold equally with respect to any change of this motion. Therefore if a tremulous motion of  body, such as a spring or bell, should agitate the adjoining particle A by pushing it forard in the direction AB, and then allowing it to come back again in the direction BA, an agitation similar to this will take place in all the particles oſ the row one aſter the other. Now if this body vibrate according to the lav of motion of a pendulum vibrating in a cycloid, the neighbouring particle of air ill of necessity vibrate in the same manner; and then Newtons demonstration needs no apology. Its only deficiency was, that it seemed to prove that this would be the way in which every particle would oſ necessity vibrate; which is not true, for the successive parcels of air will be differently agitated according to the original agitation. Newton only wants to prove the uniform propagation of the agitations, and he seleets that form which renders the prooſ easiest. He proves, in the most unexceptionahle manner, that if the prtics d a pulse oſ air are really moving like æ cyceloidal pendulum, the ſorces acting on eachæ particle, in consequen: oſ the compression and dilatation of the different parts  the pulse, are precisely such as are necessary for contiming this motion, and therefore no other forces are requimd Then since each particle is in a certain part of its path, is moving in a certain direction, and with a certain velcty, and urged by a determined force, it must? move in that very manner. The objection started by John Bernouilli agains Nevwton's demonstration ſin a single line) of the elliptieal motion of a body urged by a force in the invers duplicate ratio of the distance from the focus, is precisely the ame vwith the objection against Newtons demonstration oſ the progress of aerial undulations, and is equally ſutile. It must, however, be observed, that Newtons demonstration proceeds on the supposition that the linear agitations of a particle are incomparably smaller than the extent of an undulation. This is not strictly the case in smy instance, and in many it is far from being true. In a preũty strong twang of a harpsichord wire, the agitation of a particle may be near the 50th part of the extent of the undulation. This must disturb the regularity oſ the motion, and cause the agitations in the remote undulations to diſfæ from those in the first pulsee In the explosion of a canno, the breaking of an exhausted bottle, and many instane which may be given, the agitations are still greater. The commentators on Newton's Principia, Le Sueur and Jæquier, have shown, and Euler more clearly, that when the original agitations are very violent, the particles oſ air vill acquire a subordinate vibration compounded with the regular cycloidal vibration, and the progress of the pulses will be somewhat more rapid; but the intricacy of the calculus is s0 great, that they have not been able to determine vith any tolerable precision what the change oſ velocity ill be All this, however, is fully confirmed by experiment on sounds. The sound of a eannon at 10 or 20 miles distance does not in the least resemble its sound when near. In this case it is a loud instantaneous crack, to which we can assign no musical pitch: at a distance, it is a grave sound, of which we can tell the note; and it begins softly, swells to its greatest loudness, and then dies away growling. The same may be said of a clap of thunder, which we know to be a loud snap of still less duration. It is highly probable that the appreciable tone which those distant sounds afford are produced by the continuance of these subordinate vibrations which are added together and ſortiſied in the successive pulses, though not perceptible in the first, in a vay somewhat resembling the resonance oſ a musical chord. Newton's explanation gathers evidence thereſore ſrom this circumstance. And ve must further observe, that all elastic bodies tremble or vibrate almost precisely as a pendulum swinging in a oycloid, unless their vibrations are uncommonly violent; in which ease they are quickly reduced to a moderate quantity by the resistance of the ai. The only very loud sounds vhich ve can produce in this way are from great bells; and in these the utmost extent of the vibration is very small in comparison with the breadth of the pulsee The velocity of these sounds has not been compared with that of cannon, or perhaps it would be found less, and an objection against Newton's determination removedl. He gives 969 ſeet per second, Experiment 1142. But it is also very probable, that in the propagation through the air, the agitation gradually and rapidly approaches to this regular cycloidal form in the successive pulses, in the same vay as we observe that whatever is the form of agitation in the middle of a smooth pond oſ water, the spreading circles are always of one gentle form without asperities. In like manner, into whatever form we throwa stretched cord by the twang which we give it, it almost immediately makes smooth undulations, keeping itselſ in the shape oſ an elongated trochoid. OF this last we can de- monstrate the necessity, because the case ĩs simple. In the wave, the investigation is next to impossible; but we see the fact. We may therefore presume it in air. And accordingly we know that any noise, however abrupt and jarring, near at hand, is smooth at a distance. Nothing is more rough and harsh than the seream of a heron; but at halſ a miles distance it is soft. The ruſfle of a drum is also smooth at a distance. Fig. 90. shows the successive situations of the particles of a row. Each line of the figure shows the same particles marked with the same letters; the first particle a being supposed to be removed successively from its quiescent situation and back to it again. The mark x is put on that part of each line where the agitated particles are at their natural distances, and the air is of the natural density. The mark 1 is put where the air is most of all compressed, and : where it is most oſ all dilated; the curve line dravn through the lowest line of the figure is intended to represent the density in every point, by drawing ordinates to it from the straight line: the ordinates below the line indicate a rarity, and those above the line a density, greater than common. It appears that vhen a has come back to its natural situation, the part oſ greatest density is between the particles i and æ, and the greatest rarity between c and d. We have only to add, that the velocity of this propaga tion depends on the elasticity and density of the fluid. If thèse vary in the same proportion, that is, if the fluid has its elasticity proportional to its density, the velocity will remain the same. If the elasticity or density alone be changed, the velocity of the undulations will change in the direct subduplicate ratio of the elasticity and the inverse subduplicate ratio of the density; for should the elasticity be quadrupled, the quantity of motion produced by it in any given time ill be quadrupled. This will be the case iſ the velocity be doubled; for there would then be double the number oſ particles doubly agitated. Should the density be quadrupled, the elasticity remaining the same, the quantity of motion must remain the same. This will be the case if the velocity be reduced to one half; for this will propagate half the agitation to half the distance, which ill communieate it to twice the number of particles, and the quantity of motion vill remain the same. The same may be said of other proportions, and thereſore vxr Thereſore a change in the barometer will not aſfeet the veIocity of the undulations in air, but they will be accelerated by heat, which diminishes its density, or increases its elasticity. The velocity of the pulses in inſlammable air must be at least thrice as great, because its density is but one-tenth of that of air when the elasticity of both are the same. Let us now attend a little to the propagation of aerial pulses as they really happen; for this hypothesis of æ single row of particles is nowhere to be observed. Suppose a sphere A, Fig. 9. filled with condensed air, and that the vessel which contains it is suddenly annihilated. The air must expand to its natural dimensions, suppose BCD. But it cannot do this without pressing aside the surrounding air. We have seen that in any single row of particles this cannot be at once diſfused to a distance, but must produce a condensation in the air adjoining; which vill be gradually propagated to a distancee. Therefore this sphere BCD of the common density will form round it a shell, bounded by EFG, of condensed air. Suppose that at this instant the inner air BCD becomes solid. The shell of condensed air can expand only outwards. Let it expand till it is of the common density, occupying the shell HIK. This expansion, in like manner, must produce a shell of condensed air without it: at this instant let HIK become solid. The surrounding shell of condensed air can expand VoI. III S3 A only outward, condensing another shell without it. It ⸗ plain that this must go on continually, and the œntral agtation will be gradually propagated to a distance nn all directions. But, in this process, it is not the same numerical particles that go to a distance. Those of the origml sphere go no further than BCD, those of the next shall & no further than HIK, &e. Farther, the expansion outvards of any particle will be more moderate as the diſfusion advances; for the whole motion of each shell canmt exceed the original quantity of motion; and the number of particles in each successive shell inereases as the surſace, that is, as the square oſ the distance from the centre: thereſore the agitation of the particles will decrease in the same ratio, or will be in the inverse duplicate ratio oſ the distance from the centree. Each successive shell, thereſore, contains the same quantity of motion, and the succesiv agitations of the particles of any row out from the centre vill not be equal to the original agitation, as happens in the solitary row. But this does not affect the velocity of the propagation, because all agitations are propagated equally fast We supposed the air A to become solid as soon as it aquired the common density; but this was to facilitate the conception of the diffusion. Tt does not stop at this bulk; for while it was denser it had a tendency to expand. Therefore each particle has attained this distance with an accœlrated motion. It will, thereſore, continue this motion like a pendulum that has passed the perpendicular, till it B brought to rest by the air without it; and it is now rarer than common air, and collapses again by the greater elas ticity of the air without it. This outward air, therefore, in regaining its natural density, must expand both ways. It expands towards the centre, following the collapsing of the air within it; and it expands outwards, condensing the air beyond it. By expanding inwards, it will again condense the air within it, and this vill again expand; a siilar motion happens in all the outward shells; and thus n there is propagated a succession of condensed and rarefied shells of air, vhich gradually swell to the greatest distance. It may be demonstrated, that hen the central air has for the second time acquired the natural density, it will be at rest, and be disturbed no more; and that this will happen to all the shells in succession. But the demonstration is much too intricate for this place; we must be contented vith pointing out a ſact perfectly analogous When ve drop a small pebble into water, we see it produce a series of circular waves, hich go along the surſace of smooth vater to a great distance, becoming more and more gentle as they recede from the centre; and the middle, where the agitation was first produced, remains perfectly smooth, and this smoothness extends continually; that is, each wave, when brought to a level, remains at rest. Now these waves are produced and propagated by the depression and elevation made at the centree The elevation tends to diffuse itself; and the foree with which each particle of vater is actuated is a force acting direetly up and down, and is proportional to the elevation and depression of the particle. This hydrostatical pressure operates precisely in the same way as the condensation and rareſaction of the air; and the mathematical investigation of the propagation of the circular undulations on smooth water is similar in every step to that of the propagation of the spherical waves in still air. For this e appeal to Newton's Principia, or to Eulers Opuscula, where he gives a very beautiful investigation of the velocity of the aerial pulses; and to some memoirs of de la Grange in the collections of the academies of Berlin and Turin. These two last authors have made the investigation as simple as it seems possible, and have freed it from every objection which can be stated against the geometrical one of their great teacher Newton. Having said this much on the similarity between the waves on water and the aerial undulations, ve shall have recourse to them, as afſording us a very sensible objert to represent many aſfections of the other which it would he extremely diſficult to explain. We neither see nor ſeel the aerial undulations; and they behoved, therefore, to bæ described very abstractedly and imperfectly. In the watery wave there is no permanent progressive motion oſ the water from the centre Throw a small bit oſ cork on the surſae, and it will be observed to popple up and down without the least motion outwards. In like manner, the particles of air are only agitated a very little outwards and inwards; which motion is communicated to the particles heyond them, vhile they themselves come to rest, unless agitated afresh; and this agitation of the particles is inconceivably small. Even the explosion of a cannon at no great distance vill but gently agitate a feather, giving it a single impulæ outwards, and immediately after another inwards or towards the cannonn. When a harpsichord wire is forcibly twanged at a few ſeet distance, the agitation of the air is next to insensible. It is not, however, nothing; and it diſfers ſrom that in a watery wave by being really outwards and inwards. In consequence of this, hen the condensed shell reaches an elastic hody, it impels it slightly. Ir its elasticity be such as to make it acquire the opposite shape at the instant that the next agitation and condensed shell of air touches it, its agitation will be doubled, and aæ third agitation will increase it, and so on, till it acquire the agtation competent to that of the shell of air which reache it, and it is thrown into sensible vibration, and gives a sound extremely faint indeed, because the agitation which it aquires is that corresponding to a shell oſ air considerably removed from the original string. Hence it happens that a musical chord, pipe, or bell, will cause another to resound, vhose vibrations are isochronous with its own; or if the vibrations of the one coincides with every second, or third, or ſourth, &e. of the other; just as we can put a very j pendulum into sensible motion by giving it a genile puſf with the breath at every vibration, or at every second, third, or fourth, &e. A drum struck in the neighbourhood of another drum vill agitate it very sensibly; for here the stroke depresses a very considerable surface, and produces an agitation of a considerable mass oſ air: it will even agitate the surface of stagnant water. The explosion of a cannon vill even break a neighbouring window. The shell of condensed air which comes against the glass has a great surface and a great agitation: the best security in this case is to throw up the sash; this admits the condensed air into the room, which acts on the inside oſf the window, balancing part of the external impulse. It is demonstrated in every elementary treatise oſ natural philosophy, that vhen a wave on water meets any plane obstacle, it is reflected by it from a centre equally removed behind the obstacle; that waves radiating from the focus of a parabola are reflected in waves perpendicular to iĩts axis; that waves radiating from one ſocus of an ellipse are made to converge to the other focus, &e. &e. All this may be affirmed of the aerial undulations; that when part of a wave gets through a hole in the obstacle, it becomes the centre oſ a new series of waves; that waves bend round the extremities of an obstacle: all this happens in the aerial undulations. And, lastly, that when the surſace of water is thrown into regular undulations by one agitation, another agitation in another place will produce other regular waves, which vill cross the former without disturbing them in the smallest degree The same thing happens in air; and experiments may be made on water which ill illustrate in the most perfect manner many other affections of the aerial pulses, hich we should otherwise conceive very imperfectly. We would recommend to our curious readers to make some of these experiments in a large vessel oſ milk. Take a long and narrov plate of lead, which, when set on the bottom of the vessel, will reach above the surſace of the milk; bend this plate into a parabola, elliptical or other curvee Make the undulations by dropping miſ on the focus from a small pipe, which will cause ihe agitations to succeed with rapidity, and then all that we have said will be most distinetly seen, and the experiment vil be very amusing and instruetive, especially to the musial er. We would now request all ho make or read explations oſ natural phenomena by means oſ vibrations of ethers animal spirits, nervous fluids, &e. to fix their attention o the nature oſ the agitation in one of these undulations Let him consider whether this can produee the phenomenon, acting as any matter must act, by impulse or by pressure. If he sees that it can produce the phenomenon, he vill be able to point out the very motion it will produce, both in quantity and direction, in the same manner as Sir Isaac Newton has pointed out all the irregularities of the moons motion produced by the disturbing force of the sun. If he cannot do this, he fails in giving the first evidence oſ a mechanical explanation by the action of an elastic vibrating fluid. Let him then try to point out some palpable connexion between the general phenomena of elastic undulations and the phenomenon in question; this would show an accompaniment to have at least some probability. It is thus only we learn that the undulations of air produce sound: we cannot tell how they affect the mechanism of the ear; but we see that the phenomena of sound alwa;: accompany them, and that certain modifications oſ the one are regularly accompanied by certain modiſications of the other. If we cannot do this, ve have derived neither explanation nor illustration from the elastic fluid. And, lastly, let him remember that even if he should be able to show the competency of this fluid to the production of the phenomenon, the whole ĩs still an hypothesis, because we do not know that such a fluid exists. Ve vill venture to say, that whoever will proceed in this udent manner vill soon see the ſutility of most oſ the explanations of this kind which have been given. They are unſit for any but consummate mathematicians; for they alone really understand the mechanism of aerial undulations, and even they speak oſ them with hesitation as a thing but imperfectly understood. But even the unlearned in this science can see the incompatibility of the hypotheses vith many things which they are brought to explainn. To take an instance of the conveyance of sensation along the nerves; an elastic fluid is supposed to occupy them, and the undulations of this fluid are thought to be propagated along the nerves. Let us just think a little how the undulations would be conveyed along the surface of a canal which was completely filled up with reeds and bulrushes, or let us make the experiment on such a canal: ve may rest assured that the undulations in the one case vill resemble those in the other; and we may see that in the canal there will be no regular or sensible propagation of the waves Let these observations have their influence, along with others vhich we have made on other occasions, to wean our readers from this fashionable proneness to introduce invisible fluids and unknown vibrations into our physical discussionss. They have done immense, and, ve fear, irreparable, mischief in science; and there is but one phenomenon that has ever received any explanation by their means. This may suffice for a loose and popular account of aerial undulations; and vith it we conclude our account oſ the motion, impulse, and resistance of air. We shall now explain a number of natural appearances, depending on its pressure and elasticity, appearanees not suſficiently general, or too complicated for the purposes of argument, while ve were employed in the investigation of these properties, but too important to be passed over in silence. It is owing to the pressure of the atmosphere that two surfaces which accumtely fit each other cohere vith suc foroe. This is a ſact ſamiliarly known to the glassgrinders, polishers of marble, &e. A large lens or speculum, ground on its tool till it becomes very smooth, requires more than any man's strength to separate it directly from the tool. Ii the surface is only a square inch, it will require 15 pounis to separate them perpendicularly, though a very moderate force vill make them slide along each other. But this & hesion is not observed unless the surſaces are wetted or smeared with oil or grease; othervwise the air gets between them, and they separate withou any troublee That this eohesion is owing to the atmospheric pressure, is evident from the ease with whioh the plates may be separated in m exhausted receiver. To the same cause we must ascribe the very strong adhesion of snails, periwinkles, limpets, and other univalve shells, to the rockss The animal ſorms the rim oſ its shell, 50 as to fit the shape of the rock to which it intends to cling. It then fills its shell (if not already filled by its omn body) with water. In this condition it is evident that we must act with a force equal to 15 pounds for every square inch of touching surface before we can detach it. This may be illustrated by filling a drinking glass to the brim vith water; and having covered it with a piece oſ thin wet leather, whelm it on a table, and then try to pull it straight up; it will require a considerable foree But iſ we expose a snail adhering to a stone in the exhausted receiver, we shall see it drop off by its ovn weight. In the same manner do the remora, the polypus, the lamprey, and many other animals, adhere with such firmnesss Boys ſrequently amuse themselves by pulling out large stones ſrom the pPavement by means of a cirele of stiſf wetted leather ſastened to a string. It is owing to the same cause that the bivalve shell fishes keep themselves so firmly shut. We think the muscular force of an oyster prodigious, because  requires such ſorce to open it; but if we grind off a bit ? the convex shell, 50 as to make a hole in' it, though rithout hurting the fish in the smallest degree, it opens rith great ease, as it does also in vacuo. The pressure of the air, operating in this way, contributes nuceh to the eohesion of bodies, vhere we do not suspect ts influence The tenacity of our mortars and cements vould frequently be ineſfectual without this assistance. It is owing to the pressure of the atmosphere that a cask vill not run by the cock unless a hole be opened in some >ther part of the cask. If the cask is not quite full, some iquor indeed will run out, but it will stop as soon as the liminished elasticity of the air above the liquor is in equibrio (together with the liquor) with the atmospherio pressure. In like manner, a teapot must have a small hole in its lid to ensure its pouring out the tea. If indeed the hole in the cask is oſ lurge dimensions, it will run without any other hole, because air vill get in at the upper side of the hole while the liquor runs out by the lower part of it. On the same principle depends the performance of an instrument used by the spirit-dealers for taking out a sample of their spirits. It consists of a long tin-plate tube AB (Fig. 74.) open atop at A, and ending in a small hole at B. The end B is dipped into the spirits, which rises into the tube; then the thumb is clapt on the mouth A, and the whole is lifted out of the cask. The spirit remains in ĩt till the thumb he taken oſff; it is then allowed to run into a glass for examination. It seems principally owing to the pressure of the air that ſrosts immediately occasion a scantiness of water in our fountains and wells. This is erroneously accounted for, by supposing that the water freezes in the bowels of the earth. But this is a great mistake: the most intense frost of a Siberian winter would not ſreeze the ground two feet deep; but a very moderate frost will consolidate the whole surface of a country, and make it impervious to the air; especially the ſrost has been preceded by rain, which has sabel the surface. When this happens, the water vhich filtering through the ground is all arrested and leyt mpended in its capillary tubes by the pressure oſ ih ir, in the very same manner as the spirits are kept suspendel n the instrument just now described by the thumb's shuting the hole AA A thav melts the superficial ice, and allos the water to run in the same manner as the spirits run ?n the thumb is removed. Common air is necessary for supporting the lives oſ ms animalss If a small animal, such as a mouse or hird, h put under the receiver of an air-pump, and the ĩr  exhausted, the animal vill quickly be thrown into convuson and fall down dead; if the air be immediately readmitied, the animal will sometimes revive, especially iſ the rareſætion has been briskly made, and has not been very gra We do not know that any breathing animal can bear the àir to be reduced to à of its ordinary density, nor ev 4: nor have we good evidence that an animal will ever recoer if the rareſaction is pushed very far, although contme for a very short time. But the mere presence of the air is by no mems uſicient for preserving the life of the animal; for it is ſound, that an animal shut up in a vessel oſ air cannot Iie nũ for any length of time. If a man be shut up in a bs containing a wine hogshead of air, he cannot live in it m above an hour, and long beſore this he will find his bræaiing very unsatisſactory and uneasy. A gallon of air vil support him about a minutee. A box EF Fig. 75.) mj be made, having a pipe AB inserted into its top, and fii vith a very light valve at B, opening upwards. This pæ sends off a lateral branch d D d C, which enters the bor a the bottom, and is also fitted with a light valve at C opning upwards. If a person breathe through the pipe, keepi Lis nostrils shut, it is evident that the air which he exp 1 not enter the box by the hole B, nor retum q he pipe CD d; and by this contrivance he will gradually mploy the whole air of the box. With this apparatus exeriments can be made vithout any risk or inconveniency, md the quantity of air necessary for a given time of easy reathing may be accurately ascertained. How the air of our atmosphere produces this eſfect, is a juestion which does not belong to mechanical philosophy o investigate or determine. We can, however, aſfirm, hat it is neither the pressure nor the elasticity of the air which is immediately concerned in maintaining the animal ſunctions. We know that we can live and breathe with perfect freedom on the tops of the highest mountains. The valley of Quito in Peru, and the country round Gondur m Abyssinia, are s0 ſar elevated above the surſace of the ocean, that the pressure and the elasticity of the air are one-third less than in the low countries; yet these are populous and healthy places. And, on the other hand, we know, that when an animal has breathed in any quantity oſ air for a certain time vithout renewal, it will not only be suffocated, but another animal put into this air will die immediately; and we do not find either the pressure or elasticity of the air remarkably diminished: it is indeed diminished, but by a very small quantity. Restoring the former pressure and elasticity has not the smallest tendency to prevent the death of the animal: for an animal vill live no longer under a receiver that has its mouth inverted on vater, than in one set upon the pump-plate covered with leather. Now, when the receiver is set on water, the pressure oſ the atmosphere acts completely on the included oir, and preserves it in the same state of elasticity. In short, it is known that the air which has already served to maintain the animal functions, has its chemical and alimentary properties completely changed, and is no longer fit for this purpose. So much oſ any mass of air as has really been thus employed is changed into what is called sized air by Dr Black, or corbonic acid by the chemists of the Lavoisierian school. Any person may be convinced o this by breathing or blowing through a pipe imnersqd i Eme waterr. Every expiration will prod uce white clouds on the water, till all the lime vhich it contains is precptated in the form of pure chalk. In this case we know that the lime has combined with the fixed air. The celebrated Dr Stephen Hales made many experments vith a view to clear the air from the noxious vapour vhich he supposed to be emitted from the lungs He made use of the apparatus which we have been just now mentioning; and he put several diaphragms f, ſ, & of thin woollen stuff into the box, and moistened them with various liquidss. He found nothing so efficacious as a xlution of potash. We now understand this perſectly. I the solution is not already saturated with fixed air, ĩt wil take it up as fast as it is produced, and thus vill puriſy the air: a solution of caustic alkali therefore will have this effect till it is rendered quite mild. These experiments have been repeated, and varied in many circumstances, in order to ascertain whether this fixed air vas really emitted by the lungs, or whether the inspired air was in part changed into fixed air by its comhination with some other substance. This is a question which comes properly in our vay, and which the doctrines of pneumatics enable us to answer. If the fixed air be emitted in substance from the lungs, it does not appear hova renewal of the air into whieh it is emitted is necessary: for this does not hinder the subsequent emission; and the bul oſ the air would be increasèd by breathing in it, viæ. by the bulk of all the fixed air emitted; but, on the contrary, it is a little diminished. We must thereſore adopt the other opinion; and the discoveries in modern chemistry enable us to give a pretty accurate account of the whole proces Fixed air is acknowledged to be a compound, of which one ingredient is found to constitute about  of the whole aimospheric fluid; we mean vital air or the oxygen oſ La- voisie. When this is combined with phlogiston, according to the doctrine of Stahl, or with charcoal, according to Lavoisier, the result is fixed air or carbonic acidl. The change therefore which breathing makes on the air is the solution of this matter by vital air; and the use of air in breathing,is the carrying off this noxious principle in the way of solutionn. When therefore the air is already so far saturated as not to dissolve this substance as fast as it is screted, or must he secreted in the lungs, the animal suſfers the pain of suffocation, or is otherwise mortally affected. Suſfocation is not the only consequence; ſor we can remain for a number of seconds without breathing, and then we begin to feel the true pain of suſfocation: hut thosewho have been instantaneously struck down by an inspiration of fixed air, and aſterwards recovered to life, complained of no such pain, and seemed to have suffered chieſly by a nervous aſfection. It is said (but we will not vouch for the truth of it), that a person may saſely take a full inspiration of fixed air, if the passages of the nose be shut; and that unless these nerves be stimulated by the fixed air, it is not instantaneously mortal. But these are questions out of our present line of inquiry They are questions of physiology, and are treated of in other works. Our husiness is to explain in what manner the pressure and elasticity oſ the air, combined with the structure and mechanism oſ the hody, operate in producing this necessary secretion and removal of the matter discharged from the lungs in the act of breathing. It is well ascertained, that the secretion is made from the mass of blood during its passage through the lungs. The blood delivered into the lungs is of a dark blackish colour, and it is there changed into a florid red. In the lungs it is exposed to the action of the air in a prodigiously extended surface: for the lungs consist oſ an inconceivable number of small vessels or bladders, communicating with each other and with the windpipe. These are ſilled wih air in every inspirationn. These vessels are every?here n contact with minute hblood-veselss. The blood dos mt in toto come into immediate contact with the air; and it ruld seem that it is only the thin serous part oſ it which is aæd on by the air at the mouths of the vessels or pores, wher it stands by capillary attraction. Dr Priestley found, that venous blood enclosed in thin bladders and other menbranes was rendered ſlorid by keeping the bladders in cotaet with abundance of pure vital air. We know also, that breath is moist or damp, and must have acquired this moisture in the lungs. It is immaterial whether this sexetion of water or lymph (as the anatomists call ĩt) be furnshed by mere exudation through simple pores, or by a vasulæ and organic secretion; in either case, some ingredient of the blood comes in contact with air in the lungs, and there unites with itt. This is farther confirmed, by observing, that all breathing animals are warmer than the surrounding medium, and that by every process in which fixed air is formed from vital air heat is produced. Hence this -lution in air of sumething from the blood has been assigned by many as the source oſ animal heat. We touch on thes things in a very transitory way in this place, only i order to prove that, for the support of animal life, there must be a very extensive application of ir to the blood, and that this is made in the lungs. The question before us in this place is, How is this brought about by the weight and elasticity oſ the air? This is done in two ways; by the action of the museles of the ribs, and by the action of the diaphragm and other museles of the abdomen. The thorax or chest is a great cavity, completely filled by the lungs. The sides oſ this cavity are formed by the ribss. These are crooked or arched, and each is moveuble round its two ends, one of them being inserted into the vertebræ of the back, and the other into the sternum or breast-bone. The rib turns in a manner l resembling the handle of a drawer. The inspeetion oſ Fig. 76 vill illustrate this matter a littlee. Suppose the curves a ie, blf, clg, &e io represent the ribs moveable round the extremitie Each sueceeding rib is more bent than the one above it, and this curvature is both in the vertieal and horizontal direction. 8uppose each s0 broad as to project a little over its inferior like the tiles of a roof. It is evident, that if we take the lower one by its middle, and drav it out a little, moving it round the line n ꝑ, ĩt will bring out the next d m h along with it. Also, because the distance of the middle point o from the axis of motion np is greater than the distance of m from the axis dh, and because o vill therefore describe a portion of a larger circle than m does, the rib n o ꝑ will slide up a little under the rib d m h, or the rib d m h vill overlap nop a little more than before; the distance o m will thereſore be diminishedl. The same must happen to all the superior ribs; but the change of distance vill be less and less as we go upwardss. Nov, instead oſ this great breadth of the ribs overlapping each other, suppose each inferior rib connected with the one above it by threads or fibres susceptible of contraction at the will of man. The articulations e; a, of the first or upper rib with the spine and sternum are s broad and firm, that this rib can have little or no motion round the line a æ; this rib therefore is as a fixture for the ends of all the contracting fibres: thereſore, vhenever the fibres which connect the second rib with the first rib contract, the second must rise a little, and also go outward, and vill carry the lower ribs along with it; the third rib vill rise still farther by the contraction of the museles which connect it with the second, and so on: and thus the whole ribs are raised and thrown outward (and a little ſorward, because the articulation of each with the spine is considerably higher than that with the sternum), and the capacity of the thorax is enlarged by the contraction oſ its muscular covering. The direction of the muscular fibres is very oblique to the direction of the circular motion vhich it po duces; from which circumstance it follows, that a very minute contraction of the muscles produces all the motion vhich is necessary. This indeed is not great; the vhole motion of the lowest ribs is less than an inch in the mt violent inspiration, and the whole contraction of the mcles of the I2 ribs does not exceed the eighth part of m inch, even supposing the intercostal museles at right angles to the ribs; and being oblique, the contraction is still less. It would seem, that the intensity of the contractive pover oſ a muscular fibre is easily obtained, but that the space through which it can be exerted is very limited; for in most cases nature places the muscles in situations o great mechanical disadvantage in this respect, in order o procure other conveniences. But this is not the whole effect of the contraction of the intercostal muscles: since the compound action oſ the two sets oſ muscles, which cross each other from rib to rib Iike the letter X, is nearly at right angles to the rib, but is oblique to its plane, it tends to push the ribs closer o ther articulations, and thus to press out the two pillars on which they are articulated. Thus, supposing a  Fig. 7ĩ.) to represent the section of one of the vertebræ oſ the spine, and c d a section of the sternum, and a b c, fe d, to opposite ribs, with a lax thread b e connecting them. If this thread be pulled upwards by the middle æ till it is tight, it vil tend to pull the points b and æ nearer to eagh other, and to press the vertebra af and the sternum c d outwards The spine being the chief pillar of the body, may be considered as immoveable in the present instance The sternum is suſficiently susceptible of motion for the present purpose. It remains almost fixed atop at its articulation vith the ſirst rib, but it gradually yields below; and thus the capacity of the thorax is enlarged in this direction als. The whole enlargement oſ the diameters of the thorax dur- ing inspiration is very small, not exceeding the fiſtieth part of an inch in ordinary cases. This is easily calculated. Its quiescent capacity is about two cubic feet, and we never draw in more than I5 inches. Two spheres, one of which holds 2 cubic feet and the other 2 feet and 15 inches, ill not differ in diameter above the ſiftieth part of an inch. The other method of enlarging the capacity of the thorax is very different. It is separated from the abdomen by a strong muscular partition called the diaphragm, which is attached to firm parts all around. In its quieseent or relaxed state it is considerably convex upvards, that is, towards the thorax, rising up into its eavity like the bottom of an ordinary quart bottle, only not so regular in its shape. Many of its fibres tend from its middle to the circumference, where they are inserted into firm parts of the body. Now suppose these fibres to contract. This must drav down its middle, or make it flatter than before, and thus enlarge the capacity of the thorax. Physiologists are not well agreed as to the share which each of these actions has in the operation of enlarging the thorax. Many refuse all share of it to the intercostal muscles, and say that it is performed by the diaphragm alonee. But the ſact is, that the ribs are really observed to rise even while the person is asleep; and this cannot possibly be produced by the diaphragm, as these anatomists assert. Such an opinion shows either ignorance or neglect of the laws of pneumatics. If the capacity of the thorax vere enlarged only by drawing down the diaphragm, the pressure of the air vould compress the ribs, and make them descend. And the simple laws of mechanics make it as evident as any proposition in geometry, that the contraction of the intercostal museles must produce an elevation oſ the ribs and enlargement of the thorax; and it is one of the most heautiful contrivances oſ nature. It depends much on the will oſ the animal what share each oſ these Vor. III. 3 B actions shall have. In general, the greatest part is dm by the diaphragm; and any person can breathe in such⸗ manner that his ribs shall remain motionless; and, on the contrary, he can breathe almost entirely by raisng his chest. In the first method of breathing, the belly ræ during inspiration, because the contraction of the ĩphragm compresses the upper part oſ the bowels, and therefore squeezes them outwards; so that an ignorant persm would be apt to think that the breathing was performed by the belly, and that the belly is inſlated with the air. The strait lacing of the women impedes the motion oſ the ribs and changes the natural habit of breathing, or brings on an umatural habitt. When the mind is depresseq, it s observed that the breathing is more performed by the muxles of the thorax; and a deep sigh is always made in his vay. These observations on the manner in which the capacity of the chest can be enlarged were necessary, before we can acquire a just notion of the way in which the mechanieal properties oſ air operate in applying it to the mass of blood during its passage through the lungs. Suppose the thorax quite empty, and commuſicating with the external ar by means of the trachea or windpipe, it would then resemble a pair of bellows. Raising the hoards corresponãs to the raising of the ribs; and we might imitate the action of the diaphragm by foreibly pulling outwards the folded leather which unites them. Thus their capacity is enlarg ed, and the air rushes in at the nozzle by its weight in t same manner as vater would do. The thorax differs from bellows only in this respeet, that it is filled by the lungs which is a vast collection oſ little bladders, like the holes in a piece of ſermented bread, all communicating with the trachea, and many of them with each other. When the chest is enlarged, the air rushes into them all in the same manner as into the single cavity of an empty thorax. It cannot be said with propriety that they are inflated: all that is done is the allowing the air to come in. At the same time, as their membranous covering must have some thickness, however small, and some elasticity, it is not unlikely that, when compressed by expiration, they tend a little to recover their former shape, and thus aid the voluntary action of the muscless It is in this manner that a small bladder oſ eaoutchoue swells again aſter compression, and fills itself with air or water. But this cannot happen except in the most minute vesicles: those of sensible bulk have not elasticity enough for this purpose. The lungs of birds, however, have some very large bladders, vhich have a very considerable elasticity, and recover their shape and size with great force after compression, and thus fill themselves with air. The respiration of these animals is considerably diſferent from that oſ land animals, and their muscles act chiefly in expirationn. This will be explained by and by as a curious variety in the pneumatic instrument. This account oſ the manner in which the lungs are filled vith air does not seem agreeable to the notions we entertain of itt. We seem to suck in the air; but although it be true that we act, and exert force, in order to get air into our lungs, it is not by our action, but by external pressure, that it does come in. If we apply our mouth to the top of a bottle filled with water, we find that no draught, as e call it, of our chest will suck in any of the water; but if we suck in the very suame manner at the end of a pipe immersed in water, it ſollows immediately. Our interest in the thing makes us connect in imagination our own action with the effect, without thinking on the many steps vhich may intervene in the train of natural operations; and ve consider the action as the immediate cause of the airs reception into the lungs. It is as if we opened the door, and took in by the hand a person who was really pushed in by the crowd without. If an incision be made into the side of the thorax, so that the air ean get in by that way, when the animal acts in the usual manner, the au uil r'ly come in hy this hole, and fill the space between the lung and thorax; but no air is sucked into thæe lungs by this process, and the animal is as completely suffocated æ ĩũ;e vindpipe were shut up. And, on the other hand, iſ a læ be made into the lungs without communicating vith ©æ thorax, the animal will breathe through this hole, though the windpipe be stopped. This is successfully performæl in cases oſ patients whose trachea is shut up by accident & by inflammation; only it is necessary that this perſoratim be made into a part of the lungs where it may meet with some of the great pulmonary passages; for iſ made into some remote part oſ a lobe, the air cannot find ĩs way into the rest of the lungs through such narrow passages, obstrueted too by blood, &e. We have now explained, on pneumatical principles, the process oſ inspiration. The expiration is chiefly performei by the natural tone of the parts. In the act oſ inspiration the ribs were raised and drawn outwards in opposition to the elasticity of the solids themselves; for although the ribs are articulated at their extremities, the articulations are by no means such as to give a ſree and easy motion like the joints of the limbs. This is particularly the case in the articulations with the sternum, which are by mo means ſitted for motionn. It vould seem that the motion really produced here iĩs chiefly by the yielding of the cutilaginous parts and the bending of the rib; when therfore the muscles which produced this effect are allowed © relax, the ribs again collapsee Perhaps this is assisted a little by the action of the long muscles which come doWa across the ribs without heing inserted into them. Thes may drav them together a little, as we compress a loos bundle by a string. In like manner, vhen the diaphragm was drawn down, it compressed the abdomen in opposition to the elasticity of all the viscera contained in it, and to the elasticity and tone oſ the teguments and muscles which surround it. When therefore the diaphragm is relaxed, these parts push it up again into its natural situation, and in doing this expel the air from the lungs. If this be a just aceount of the matter, expiration should be performed without any effort. This accordingly is the cise. We fſeel that, aſter having made an ordinary easy inspiration, it requires the continuance oſ the effort to keep the thorax in this enlarged state, and that all that is necessary for expiration is to cease to act. No person feels any diſficulty in emptying the lungs; but weak people oſten feel a diſficulty oſ inspiration, and compare it to the feeling of a weight on their breast; and expiration is the last motion of the thorax in a dying person. But nature has also given us a mechanism by which ve cãn expire, namely, the abdominal muscles; and when we have ſinished an ordinary and easy expiration; we ean stll expel a considerable bulk of air (nearly half of the contents oſ the lungs) by contracting the abdominal museles. These, by compressing the body, force up its moveable contents agdainst the diaphragm, and cause it to rise further into the thorax, acting in the suame manner as when we expel the ſuces per anum. When a person breathes out as much air as he can in this manner, he may òbserve that his ribs do not collapse during the whole operation. There seems then to be a certain natural unconstrained state of the vesicles of the lungs, and a certain quantity of air necessary for keeping them oſ this size. It is probuble that this state of the lungs gives the ſreest motion to the bloodc. Were they more compressed, the blood-vessels would be compressed by the adjoining vesicles; were they more lax, the vessels would be more erooked, and by this mèans obstrueted. The ſrequent mspirations graduaãlly change this air by mixing fresh air with iĩt, and at every expiration carrying oſf some oſ itt. In catarrhs and inflammations, especially hen attended with suppuration, the small passages into the remote vessels are ohstrucied, and thus the reneval oſ air in them will be prevented The painful ſeeling which this occasions causes us to expæ the air with violence, shutting the windpipe, till we have eerted strongly with the abdominal muscles, and made æ strong compression on the lower part of the thorax We then open the passage suddenly, and expel the air and obstructing matter by violent coughing. We have said, that birds exhibit a curious variety in the process oſ breathingg The muscles of their wings being s0 very great, required a very extensive insertion, and this is one use of the great breast-hone. Another use oſ it is, to form a firm partition to hinder the action of these muxiæ from compressing the thorax in the act of ſlying: thereſoe the form oſ their chest does not admit oſ alternate enlargement and contraction to that degree as in land animals Moreover, the muscles of their abdomen are also very small; and it would seem that they are not suſficient for producing the compression on the bowels which is necssary for carrying on the process of concoction and digestion Instead oſ aiding the lungs, they receive help ſfrom them In an ostrich, the lungs consist of a ſleshy part A, A (Fig. 8.), composed oſ vesicles like those of land animals, and, like theirs, serving to expose the blood to the action of the air. Besides these, they have on each side ſour large bags B, C, D, E, each of which has an oriſice G communicating with the trachea; but the second, C, has also an orifice H, by which it communicates with another bag F situated below the rest in the abdomen. Now, when the lungs are compressed by the action of the diaphragm, the air in C is partly expelled by the trachea through the orifice G, and partly driven through the orifice H into the bag F, which is then allowed to receive it; because the mame action which compresses the lungs enlarges the abdomen. When the thorax is enlarged, the bag C is parily “supplied ith ſresh air through the trachea, and partly from the bag F. As the lungs of other animals resemble a common bellows, the lungs of birds resemble the smith's bellows with a partition; and anatomists have discovered passages from this part of the lungs into their hollow bones and quill. We do not know all the uses of this contrivance; and only can observe, that this alternate action must assist the muscles of the abdomen in promoting the motion of the food along the alimentary canal, &c. We can distinctly observe in hirds that their belly dilates when the chest collapses, and vice versa, contrary to what we see in the land animals. Another use of this double passage may be to produce a circulation of air in the lungs. by which a compensation is made for the smaller surface oſ action on the blood: for the number of small vesicles, oſ equal capacity with these large bags, gives a much more extensive surface. : If we try to raise mereury in a pipe by the action oſ the chest alone, we cannot raise it above two or three inches; and the attempt is both painful and hazardous. It is painful chiefly in the breast, and it provokes coughing. Probably the fluids ooze through the pores of the vesicles by the pressure of the surrounding parts. On the other hand, ve can by expiration support mercury about five or six inches high: but this also is very painful, and apt to produce extravasation of bloodc This seems to be done entirely by the abdominal muscles. The operation properly termed sucEING is totally different from breathing, and resembles exceedingly the aetion of a common pump. Suppose a pipe held in the mouth, and its lover end immersed in waterr. We fſill the mouth vith the tongue, bringing it ſorward, and applymg it closely to the teeth and to the palate; we then drav it back, or bend it downwards (behind) ſrom the palate, thus leaving a void. The pressure oſ the air on the cheeks immediately depresses them, and applies them close to the gums and teeth; and its pressure on the vater in the vessel causes it to rite through the pipe into the empty part of the mou vhieh iĩt quickly fills. We then push forward the tip oſ tæ tongue, below the water, to the teeth, and apply it n them all round, the water being above the tongue, which  kept much depressed. We then apply the tongue to the plate beginning at the tip, and gradually going backward in ſis applicationn. By this means the water is gradually forœd backward by an operation similar to that of the gullet n swallowing. This is done by contracting the gullet aboæ and relaxing it below, just as ve would empty a gut of is contents by draving our closed hand along it. By this operation the mouth is again completely occupieĩ by the tongue, and we are ready for repeating the operation Thus the mouth and tongue resemble the barrel and ſistn of a pump; and the application of the tip of the tongue b the teeth performs the office of the valve at the bottom of the barrel, preventing the return of the water into the pip Although usual, it is not absolutely necessary to withdraw the tip of the tongue, making a void before the tongue. Sucking may be perſormed by merely sepurating the tongue gradually from the palate, beginning at the rot If we withdraw the tip of the tongue a very minute quantity, the water gets in and flows back above the tongue. The action of the tongue in this operation is very poverful; some persons can raise mercury 25 inches: but this strong exertion is very fatiguing, and the soſt paris mæ prodigiously swelled by it. It causes the blood to oæ plentifully through the pores of the tongue, ſauces, aĩ palate, in the same manner as i? a cupping-glass and |ringe were applied to them; and, when the inside of te mouth is excoriated or tender, as is frequent with inſants even a very moderate exertion of this kind is accompaniæ vith extravasation of bloodc. When children suck the nurse's breast, the milk follows their exertion by the præ sure oſ the air on the breast; and a weak child, or one that withholds its exertions on account of pain from the nbove-mentioned cause, may be assistèd by a gentle pressure of the hand on the breast: the infant pupil of nature, without any knovledge of pneumaties, frequently helps itself by pressing its face to the yielding breast. In the whole of this operation the breathing is performed through the nostrils; and it is a prodigious distress to an infant vhen this passage is obstruoted by mucus. We beg to be forgiven for observing by the way, that this obstruction may be almost certainly removed for a little while, by rubbing the childs nose with any liquid of quick evaporation, or even with water. The operation in drinking is not very diſferent from that in sucking: ve have indeed little occasion here to suck, but we must do it a littlee. Dogs and some other animals cannot drink, but only lap the water into their mouths with their tongue, and then swallow it. The gallinaceous birds seem to drink very imperſectly; they seem merely to dip their head into the water up to the eyes till their mouth is filled with water, and then holding up the head, it gets into the gullet by its weight, and is then swallowed. The elephant drinks in a very complicated manner; he dips his trunk into the water, and fills it by making a void in his mouth: this he does in the contrary way to man. Afſter having depressed his tongue, he begins the application of it to the palate at the root, and by extending the application forward, he expels the air by the mouth which came into it from the trunk. The process here is not very unlike that of the condensing syringe without a piston valve, formerly deseribed, in which the external air (corresponding here to the air in the trunk) enters by the hole F in the side, and is expelled through the hole in the end oſ the barrel; by this operation the trun is filled with water: then he liſts his trunk out of the water, and bringing it to his mouth, pours the contents into it, and swallows it. On considering this operation, it appears that, by the same process by vhich the air of the trunk is taken into the mouth, the wa- ter could also be taken in, to be aſtervards swalloved: but ve do not find, upon inquiry, that this is done by the elephant; we have always observed him to drink in the mnner now described. In either way ĩt is a double operaim and cannot be carried on any way but by alternately suœing and swallowing, and vhile one operation ĩs going on the other is interrupted; whereas man can do both at the same time. There is an operation similar to that of the elepham, which many find a great difficulty in acquiring, viz keeping up a continued blast with a blow-pipe. We would desire our chemical reader to attend minutely to the gradual action of his tongue in sucking, and he will find ĩt such we have deseribedc Let him attend particularly to te way in which the tip of the tongue performs the officœ oſ a valve, preventing the return of the water into the pipe: the same position of the tongue would hinder air from coming into the mouth. Next let him observe, that in swallowing wvhat water he has now got lodged above his tongue, he continues the tip of the tongue applied to the teeth; now let him shut his mouth, keeping his lips firm together, the tip oſ the tongue at the teeth, and the whole tongue forcibly kept at a distance from the mlate; bring up the tongue to the palate, and allow the tip o s parate a little from the teeth; this will expel the air ino the space between the fauces and cheeks, and will hlov up the cheeks a little: then, acting with the tip oſ the longue as a valve, hinder this air from getting back, and depressing the tongue again, more air (from the nostrils) vill get into the mouth, which may be expelled into the space vithout the teeth as before, and the cheeks will be more inflated: continue this operation, and the lips ill no longer be able to retain it, and it will ooze through as long as the operation is continued. When this has become ſomiliar and easy, take the blow-pipe, and there will be m diſficulty in maintaining a blast as uniſorm as a smith's hel- ows, breathing all the while through the nostrilss The >nly diſficulty is the holding the pipe: this fatigues the ips; but it may be removed by giving the pipe a convenient shape, a pretty ſlat oval, and wrapping it round vith leather or thread. Another phenomenon depending on the principles already established, is the land and sea-breeze in the warm countries. We have seen that air expands exceedingly by heat; thereſore heated air, being lighter than an equal bulk of old air, must rise in it. If ve lay a hot stone in the sunshine in a room, we shall observe the shadow oſ the stone surrounded vwith a ſluttering shadow of different degrees of brightness, and that this flutter rises rapidly in a column above the stone. I ve hold an extinguished candle near the stone, we shall see the smoke move towards the stone, and then ascend up from it. Now, suppose an island receiving the first rays oſ the sun in a perfectly calm morning; the ground will soon be warmed, and vill varm the contiguous air. If the island be mountainous, this eſfeet will be more remarkable; because the inclined sides of the hills will receive the light more directly: the midland air vill therefore be most varmed: the heated air will rise, and that in the middle vill rise fastest: and thus a current oſ air upwards vill begin, which must be supplied by air coming in from all sides, to be heated and to rise in its turn; and thus the morning sea-breexe is produced, and continues all day. This current will frequently be reversed during the night, by the air cooling and gliding down the sides of the hills, and we shall have the land-breeæe. It is owing to the same cause that we have a cireulation of air in mines vhich have the mouths of their shafts oſ unequal heights. The temperature underground is pretty constant through the whole year, while that of the atmosphere is extremely variablee. Now, suppose a mine having a long horizontal drifi, communicating between tvo pits 7 or shaſts, and that one of these shaſts ter minates na valle vhile the other opens on the brow of a hill perhaps Ib feet higher. Let us further suppose it summæ, ad iæ air heated to 65, while the temperature oſ the eæt s bu 45; this last will be also the temperature of the àr n ſæ shaſts and the drift. Now, sinee air expands nearly 2 parts in 10,000 by one degree of heat, we shall hare æ odds of pressure at the bottom of the two shaſts equal v nearly the 20th part oſ the weight of a column of ar ſn ſeet high (I00 feet being supposed the diſference of i: heights of the shaſts). This will be about x ounces m every square foot of the section of the shaftt. Iſ iis prsure could be continued, it would produce a prodigious current of air down the long shaſt, along the driſt, a u the short shaft. The weight of the air acting through In ſeet would communicate to it the velocity of 50 ſeet æ second: divide this by Vẽ, that is, by 4,5, and ve :hil have I8 feet per second for the velocity: this is the velcity of what is called a brisk gale This pressure nould he continued, if the varm air which enters the long shaſt were cooled and condensed as fast as it comes in; but this s not the case. It is however cooled and condensed, and a eurrent is produced suſficient to make an abundant cirevIation of air along the whole passage; and care is taken bo dispose the shaſts and conduet the passages in such a mner that no part of the mine is out of the circlee Whe any nev lateral drift is made, the renewal of air at ils &tremity becomes more imperſect as it advances; and vhe it ĩs carried a certain length, the air stagnates and hecom suffocating, till either a communication can be made with the rest of the mine, or a shaſt be made at the end of ihis driſt. As this current depends entirely on the differenæ o temperature between the air below and that above, it mos cease when this difference ceases. Accordingly, in the spring and autumn, the miners complain much of stagn- on; but in summer they never vant a eurrent from the eep pits to the shallow, nor in the winter a current from 11e shallow pits to the deep ones, It frequently happens lso, that in mineral countries the chemical changes which re going on in difſferent paris of the earth make differnces of temperature sufſicient to produce a sensible current. It is easy to seœ that the same causes must produce a urrent down our chimneys in summer. The chimney is older than the summer air, and must therefore condense ,, and it vill come down and run out at the doors and rindovs. And this naturally leads us to consider a very important ſfect of the expansion and consequent ascent of air by heat, amely, the draving (as it is called) of chimneys. The ir which has contributed to the burning of fuel must be ntensely heated, and vill rise in the atmosphere. This vill also be the case with much oſ the surrounding air which s come very near the fire, although not in contact with t. If this heated air be made to rise in a pipe, it will be tept together, and therefore ill not soon eool and eollapse: hus we shall ohtain a long column of light air, which will ise vith a force so much the greater as the eolumn is longer r more heatedlc. Therefore the taller ve make the chimey, or the hotter e make the fire, the more rapid will be he current, or the draught or suction, as it is injudiciousy called, will be 5o much the greater. The ascensional ſorce is the difference between the weight of the column of heated air in the funnel and a eolumn of the surrounding atmosphere of equal height. We inerease the draught, therefore, by inereasing the perpendicular height of the chimney. Its length in a horizontal direetion gives no increase, but, on the contrary, diminishes the draught, by cooling the air before it gets into the eſfective part of the fuunel. We increase the draught also by obliging all the uir hich enters the chimney to come very near the fuel; therefore a lov mantle-piece will produce this effect; also ſilling up all the spaces on each side of the gra:. Wha much air gets in above the fire, by having a loſty maniæpiece, the general mass of air in the chimney camot h much heatedl. Hence it must happen that the greatest draught will be produced by bringing down the mſepiece to the very ſfuel; but this converts a fire- place mo a ſfurnace, and by thus sending the whole air through ſæ fuel, causes it to burn with great rapidity, producng ⸗ prodigious heat; and this producing an inerease of axasional force, the current becomes furiously rapid, and iheat and consumption of fuel immense. If the fire-plæ be a cube of a foot and a half, and the front closd by a door, so that all the air must enter through the hotiom of the grate, a chimney of 15 or 20 feet high, and suſficenily vide to give passage to all the expanded air which can pas through the fire, will produce a eurrent which will roar like thunder, and a heat suſficient to run the whole inside into a lump of glass. All that is necessary, however, in a chamber ſire-place, is a current suſficiently great for carrying up the smoke and vitiated air of the ſue. And as ve want als the enlivening ſlutter and light-of the ſire, ve give the chimmeypiece both a much greater height and width than what is merely necessary for carrying up tHe smoke, only ihing to have the current suſficiently determinate and steady ſor counteracting any oceasional tendency which it may sme times have to come into the room. By allowing a greate quantity oſ air to get into the chimney, heated only oa moderate degree, ve produce a more rapid renewal of iæ air of the room: did we oblige it to come so much nearer the fire as to produce the same renewal of the air in consquence of a more rapid current, we should produce an iconvenient heatt. But in this country, where pit-coal is n general so very cheap, we carry this indulgence to an etreme; or rather, ve have not studied how to get all ſhe desired advantages with economy. A mueh smaller re eval of air than ve commonly produce is abundantly holesome and pleasant, and ve may have all the pleasure ſ the light and flame of the ſuel at much less expense, by mtracting greatly the passage into the vent. The best ay oſ doing this is by contracting the brick-work on each de behind the mantle-piece, and reducing it to a narroW arallelogram, having the back of the vent for one oſ its mg sides. Make an iron plate to fit this hole, of the same mgth, but broader, so that it may lie sloping, its lower dge being in contact with the foreside of the hole, and its pper edge leaning on the back of the vent. In this posion it shuts the hole entirely. Now let the plate have a inge along the ſront or lower edge, and fold up like the d oſ a chestt. We shall thus be able to enlarge the pasage at pleasuree In a fire-place fit ſor a room of 24 feet y l8, iſ this plate may be about I8 inches long from side o side, and folded back within an inch or an inch and a alſ of the wall, this will allow passage for as much air as 7ill keep up a very cheerful fire; and by raising or lowerng this REGISTER, the fire may be made to burn more or ess rapidly. A ſree passage oſ half an inch vill be suſfiient in weather that is not immoderately cold. The priniple on which this construction produces its effect is, that he air which is in the front of the fire, and much warmed  it, is not allowed to get into the chimney, where t would be immediately hurried up the vent, but rises 1p to the ceiling, and is diffused over the whole room. ſhis double motion of the air may be distinetly observed  opening a little of the door and holding a candle in the vay. If the candle be held near the ſloor, the flame will  blown into the room; but if held near the top of the loor, the flame will be blown outward. But the most perſect method of wvarming an apartment in hese temperate climates, vhere ve can indulge in the cheerſulness and sweet air produced by an open fire, is vhat we call a stove-grate, and our neighbours on the con. tinent call a chapelle, from its resemblance to the chaꝶ: or oratories in the great churehes. In the great chimney-piece, which, in this case, may h made even larger than ordinary, is set a smaller om fitted up in the same style of ornament, but of a size no græate than is suſficient for holding the fuel. The sides and bat of it are made of iron (cast iron is preſerable to hammer⸗i iron, because it does not so readily calcine), and ar ept at a small distance from the sides and back of the man chimney-piece, and are continued down to the hearth, that the ash-pit is also separated. The pipe or chimney o the stove grate is carried up behind the ornaments of the mantle-piece till it rises above the mantle-piece oſ the main chimney-piece, and is fitted with a register or damperplate turning round a transverse axiss. The best ſorm of this register is that which we have recommended for an odinary fire-place, having its axis or joint close at the ſront; 30 that when it is open or turned up, the bumt air and smoke striking it obliquely, are directed with certainty into the vent, without any risk of reverberating and coming out into the room. All the rest of the vent is shut up by on plates or brick-work out of sight. The effect of this construction is very obvious The fuel, being in immediate contact with the back and sdes oſ the grate, heat them to a great degree, and they heat the air contiguous to them. This heated air cannot get ṹ the vent, because the passages above these spaces are shul up. It thereſore comes out into the room; some of ĩt go: into the real ſire-place and is carried up the vent, an the rest rises to the ceiling, and is diffused over the rom. It is surprising to a person who does not consider it wiſ skill how powerfully this grate warms a room. Less tha one-fourth of the fuel consumed in an ordinary ſire-place is suſicient; and this with the same cheerſul blazing heart and salutary renewal oſ air. It even requires attention Io keep the room eool enough. The heat communicated ? l hose parts in contact with the fuel is needlessly great; nd it will be a considerable improvement to line this part rith very thiek plates of cast iron, or with tiles made of re-clay, which will not crack with the heat. These; being ery bad conduetors, will make the heat, ultimately comnunicated the air, very moderate. If, with all these recautions, the heat should be found too great, it may e brought under perſeet management hy opening passages ito the vent from the lateral spaces. These may be valves r trap-doors moved by roũs eoncealed beliind the ornaments. Thus we have a fire-place under the most complẽte reulation, where we can always have a cheerful ſire without eing for a quarter of an hour incommoded by the heat; nd we can as quickly raise our fire, vhen too low; by anging on a plate of iron on the front, which shall reach S low as the grate: This in five minutes vill blow up the re into a glow; and the plate may be sent out oſ the oom, or set behind the stove: grãte out of sight. The propriety of enelosing the ash-pit is not so obvious; ut if this be not done, the light ashes, not finding a ready nssage up the chimney, vill come out into the room along rith the heated æir. We do not eonsider in this place the various extraneous ireumstances which impede the current of air in our chimeys; and produce smoky houses; but only the theory of his motion in general, and the modifications of its operaion arising from the various purposes to which it may be pplied. Under this head we shall next give a general account and lescription of the method of warming apartments by stoves.  SToVE in general is a fire-place shut up on all sides, uving only a passage ſor admitting the air to support the ire, and a tube for carrying off the vitiated air and smoke; nd the air of the room is warmed by coming into contact vith the outside of the stove and ſlue:. The general prinVoL. III 3C ciple of construction, therefore, is very simple The it must be made to come into as close contact as pusible æ; the fire, or even to pass through it, and this in such quatities as just to consume a quantity of fuel sufficen ſor producing the heat required; and the stove must be nmstructed, that both the burning fuel and the air which s been heated by it shall be applied to as extensive a uriæ as possible of furnace, all in contact with the air of tæ room; and the heated air within the stove must not hæ àlowed to get into the funnel which is to carry it off; tillitꝶ too much cooled to produce any considerable heat on ũæ outside of the stove. In this temperate climate no great ingenuity is neæsary for varming an ordinary apartment; and stoves are mide rather to please the eye as furniture than as economũ substitutes for an open fire of equal calorific power. Bui our neighbours on the continent, and especially towards ih north, where the cold of winter is intense, and fuel ver; dear, have bestowed much attention on their construction, and have combined ingenious economy with every elegane of form Nothing can be handsomer than the stoves of Fayencerie that are to be seen in French Flandens, or the Russian stoves at St Petersburgh, ſinished in stueœ. Our readers vill not, therefore, be displeased with a dexription of them. In this place, however, we shall only consider a stove in general as a subject oſ pneumatical discussion The general form, thereſore, of a stove, and of which all others are only modifications adapted to circumstance o utility or taste, is as ſollos: MIKL (Fig. 79.) is a quadrangular box of any size i the directions MI LE The inside width from ſront to back is pretty constant, never less than ten inches, and rarely extending ſo twenty; the included space is dividei by a great many partitionss. The lowest chamber AB is the receptacle ſor the ſuel, which lies on the hottom oſ iſe stove without any grate: this fire-place has a door AO rning on hinges, and in this door is a very small wicket : the roof of the fire-place extends to within a very few ches of the farther end, leaving a narrow passage B for e flame. The next partition bB is about eight inches gher, and reaches almost to the other end, leaving a narw passage for the flame at B. The partitions are repeat1 above, at the distance of eight inches, leaving passages the ends, alternately disposed as in the figure; the last ſ them H communieates with the room vent. This commication may be regulated by a plate of iron, which can e slid across it by means of a rod or handle which comes ough the sidee The more usual way oſ shuttng up this assage is by a sort of pan or bowl oſ earthen ware which 1 whelmed over it with ĩts brim resting in sand contained 1 a groove formed all round the hole This damper is inroduced by a door in the front, which is then shut. The vhole is set on low pillars, so that its bottom may be a feW nches from the floor of the room: it is usually placed in 1 corner, and the apartments are so disposed that their himneys can be joined in stacks as with us. Some strav or wood-shavings are first burnt on the earth at its farther end. This warms the air in the stove, md creates a determined current. The fuel ĩs then laid m the hearth close by the door, and pretty much piled up. It is now kindled; and the current being already directed to the vent, there is no danger of any smoke coming out into the room. Effectually to prevent this, the door is shut, and the wicket P opened. The air supplied by this, being directed to the middle or bottom of the fuel, quickly indles it, and the operation goes on. The aim of this construetion is very obvious. The flame and heated air are retained as long as possible within the body of the stove by means of the long passages; and the narrowness of these passages obliges the flame to come in contact with every particle of soot, so as lo consume it completely, and thus convert the whole combustible matter of the fuel nto heat. For want of this a very considemhle Jtion of our fuel is wasted by our open fires, eve: mder iæ very best management: the soot which sticks io or ven is very inflammable, and a pound veight of iĩt vil gre a much if not more heat than a pound of coal. And vai sticks to our vents is very inconsiderable in comparism vih vhat escapes unconsumed at the chimney top. In ſire of green wood, peat, and ome kinds of pit-ooal, nearly one fifth of the fuel is lost in this way; but in these stoves the. is hardly ever any mark of soot to be seen; and even ihis mmall quantity is produced only aſter lighting the ſire The volatile inflammable matters are expelled from paris much heated indeed, but not so hot as to burn; a me of it charred or half-burnt cannot he any further coœmed, being enveloped in flame and air already vitiated an unſit for combustion. But when the stove is well heatei, and the current brisk, no part of the soot escapes the æ tion of the air. The hot air retained in this manner in the body of the stove is applied to its sides in a very extended surſaææ To inerease this still more, the stove is made narrover ſrom front to hack in its upper part; a certain breadth is neæs sary helow, that there may be room for fuel. Iſ this breadth were preserved all the way up, much heat vould be lost, because the heat communicated to the partitions of the stove does no good. By diminishing their breadih, he proportion of useful surſace is increasedc. The whole body of the stove may he considered as a long pipe ſolded uj and its effect would be the greatest possible iſ it really wee s0; that is, if each partition c C, d D, &e. vere split into two, and a free passage allowed between them for the air oſ the room Something like this will be observed aſterwards in some German stoves. It is with the same view of making an extensive applotion oſ a hot surface to the air, that the stove is not buili on the wall, nor even in contact with it, nor with the ſioor: r by its detached stuation, the air in contact with the k, and vith the bottom (vhere it is hottest), is varmed, 1d eontributes at least one-half of the whole effect; for e great heat of the bottomm makes its eſfect on the air of ©e room at least equal to that of the two ends. Somemes a stove makes part of the wall between too small woms, and is found sufficient. It must be remarked, on the whole, that the effect of a ove depends much on keeping in the room the air already eated by it. This is so remarkably the case, that a small pen fire in the same room vill be so far from increasing s heat, that it will greatly diminish it: it will even draw he varm air from a suite oſ adjoining apartments This 3 distinotly observed in the houses of the English merchmts in St Petersburgh: their habits of life in Britain make hem uneasy vithout an open fire in their sitting rooms; nd this obliges them to heat all their stoves twice a-day, md their houses are coler than those of the Russians who eat them only once:. In many German houses, especially f the lower class, the fire-place oſ the stove does not open nto the room, but into the yard or lobby, where all the ſires are lighted and tended; by this means is avided the xpense of varm air which must have been carried off by the stove: but it is evident, that this must be very unpleasant, and cannot be wholesome. We must breathe the same quantity of stagnant air, loaded with all the væpours and exhalations which must be produeed in overy inhabitd place. Going into one of these houses from the open air, is like putting one's head into a stew-pan or under a pie-crust, and quickly nauseates us who are aceustomed to ſresh air and cleanſiness. In these countries it isa matter almost of necessity to fumigate the rooms with frankincense and other gums burnt. The censer in ancient worship was in all probability an utensil introduced by necessity for sweetening or rendering tolerable the air of a crowded place: and it is a constant practics in the R ussian houss ſx æ servant to go round the room aſter dinner, waving a æ ser with some gums burning on bits of charcoal The account now given of stoves for heating roms and of the circumstances which must be attended to n their construetion, vill equally apply to hot walls in gardenng vhether within or without doors The only new cirmstance which this employment of a flue introduces, is the attention which must be paid to the equability of the he and the gradation which must be observed in different pans of the building. The heat in the flue gradually diminishe as it recedes from the fire-place, because it is contmually giving out heat to the flue. It must thereſore be - conducted through the building by ſrequent returns, ſha n every part there may be a mixture oſ warmer and cler branches of ihe flue, and the final chimney should be clæ by the fire-placee It would, however, he improper run the flue from the. end of the floor up to the ceiling where the second horizontal pipe would be placed, and then return it downward again, and make the third horæontal ſlue adjoining to the first, &e This would make the middle of the wall the coldest. If it is the flue of a greenhouse, this would be highly improper, because the upper part of the wall can be very little employed; and n this case it is better to allow the flue to proceed gradually up the wall in its different returns, by which the lowest par would be the warmest, and the heated air will asœi among the pots and planis; but in a hot wall, where ũæ trees are to receive heat by contact, some approximation 1 the above method may be useſul In the hypocausta and sudaria of the Greeks and Rmans, the flue was conducted chieſly under the ſioors Mait-kilns are a species of stove which merit our aliention. Many attempts have been made to improve them œ the principle of flue-stoves; but they have been unsu- Ful, because heat is not what is chiefly wanted in malting: &t is a copious current of very dry air to carry off the moisture. All that is to be attended to in the different kinds of melting furnaces is, that the current of air be suſficiently rapid, and that it be applied in as extensive a surſace as possible to the substance to be melted. The more rapid the current it is the hotter, because it is consuming more fuel; and therefore its eſfect increases in a higher proportion than its rapidity. It is doubly effectual if twice as hot; and if it then be twice as rapid, there ĩs tice the quantity of doubly hot air applied to the subject; it would therefore be four times more powerful. This is procured by raising the chimney of the furnace to a greater height. The close application of it to the subjeot can hardly be laid down in general terms, because it depends on the precise circumstances of each case. In reverberatory furnaces, such as refining furnaces for gold, silver, and copper, the ſlume is made to play over the surſace of the melted metal. This is produced entirely by the form of the furnace, by making the arch of the furnace as low as the cireumstances of the manipulation will allow. Experience has pointed out in general the chief circumstances of their construction, vi. that the fuel should be at one end on a grate, through which the air enters to maintain the fire, and that the metal should be placed on a level floor between the fuel and the tall chimney which produces the current. But there is no kind of furnace more variable in its effeet, and almost every place has a small peculiarity oſ construction, on which its pre-eminence is rested. This has occasioned many whimsical varieties in their form. This uncertainty seems to depend much on a circumstance rather ſoreign to our present purpose; but as ve do not ohserve it taken notice of by mineralogical writers, ve beg leave to mention it here. It is not heat alone that is vanted in the refining oſ silver by lead, for instance. We must make a continual appiœtion to its surface of air, which has not contribuiæd to the combustion of the fuel. Any quantity of the hotist air, already saturated vith the ſfuel, nay play on the suriææ oſ the metal ſor ever, and heep. it in the state of mos pĩE fusion, but without reſining it n the least. Now, n ſhæ ordinary construction of a furnace, thia is much the c If the whole air has come in by the grate, and pai through the middle of the fuel, it can hardly be othæm than nearly saturated vith it; and if air be als admitied by the door (vhich is generally. done or something equiralent), the pure air lies above the vitiated air, anàl duing the passage along the horizontal part of the ſumace, md along the surface of the metal, it atill keeps above i, n least there is nothing to promote their mixture. Thus iæ metal does not come into eontact ith air ſfit to act on ihæ hase metal aud uliins it, aul the opstion of reſining goe on slowly. Trifling ciroumstances in the form of the arch or canal may tend to promote the junhling of the as gether, and thus render the operation more expeditions; and as these are but ill undertood, or perhaps this crcumstance not attended to, no wonder that we see theæ cnsidered as so many nostrums of great importance Iit vere therefore worth while to try the eſfeet of changes n the form of the roof directed to this very circumstance Perhaps some little prominence down from the arch of the verberatory would have this eſfect, by suddenly throwing the current into confusion. If the additional length oſ pasage do not cool the air oo much, we should think that if there were interposed between the fuel and the refining floor a passage twisted like a cork- serew, making just hal a turn, it would be most effectual: for ve imagine, thai the two airs, keeping each to their respective sides of the passage, would by this means be turned upside down, and that the pure stratum would now be in contact with the metal, and the vitiated air vould he above it. . 6 l hole, and thus the passage for the air is kept unobstruciæ It was thought impossible to produce or maintain this crent without bellows; but Mr Cotterel, an ingenious ſounder, tried the eſfect of a tall dome placed over the mouh oſ the furnace, and though it was not half the height oſ mny glass-house domes it had the desired effeett Considerabie difficulties, however, occurred; and he had not surmounted them all when he leſt the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, nor have we heard that he has yet brought the invention o perfection. It is extremely diſficult to place the holes blow, at which the air is to enter, at such a precis height as neither to be choked by the melted matter, nor o leare ore and stones below them unmelted; but the invention is very ingenious, and vill be of immense service ĩ it can be perſected; for in many places iron ore is to be found wher water cannot be had for working a blast furſace. The last application which we shall make of the currents produced by heating the air is to the freeing mines, ships, prisons, &e. ſrom the damp and noxious vapours which frequently inſest them. As a driſt or work iꝶ carried on in the mine, let a trunk of deal boards, about six or eight inches square, be laid along the bottom of the drift, communicating with a trunk carried up in the corner of one of the shafts. Let the top of this last trunk open into the ash-pit of a small furnac, having a tall chimney. Let fire be kindled in the ſurnaæ; and vhen it is well heated, shut the fire-place and ash-ꝑit doors. There being no other supply for the current p duced in the chimney of this furnace, the air vill flow inio it from the trunk, and will bring along with it all the offensive vapours. This is the most eſfectual method yet ſolnd out. In the same manner may trunks be conducted into the ash-pit oſ a ſurnace from the cells oſ a prison or the wards oſ an hospital. In the account vhich ve have been giving oſ the mnagement of air in furnaces and common fſires, we have In short, it is now fully established, that it is not a m⸗ nical but a chemical phenomenonn We can only inform the chemist, that a candle will consume faster in the Low Countries than in the elevated regions of Quito and Gui, because the air is nearly one-half denser below, anã vi act proportionally faster in decomposing the eandle We shall conclude this part of our subjeet with the æxplanation of a curious phenomenon observed in many plææ Certain springs or fountains are observed 1o have perioh of repletion and scantiness, or seem to ebb and flon at æ gular intervals; and some of these periods are of a compiieated nature. Thus a vell will have several ætum of high and low water, the diſference of which gradualiy ncreases to a maximum, and then diminishes, just a wòserve in the ocean. A very ingenious and probable explnation of this has been given in No 4”24 of the Philosphical Transactions, by Mr Atwell, as ſollows: Let ABCD (Fig. 50.) represent a cavern, ino æhich water is brought by the subterraneous passage OT. Let it have an outlet MNP, oſ a crooked form, with ĩts highes: part N considerably raised above the bottom of the cavern, and thence sloping downwards into lower ground, and tæminating in an open vell at P. Let the dimensions oſ this canal be such that it will discharge much more water than is supplied by TO. Alll this is very natural, and may very common. The effect of this arrangement vill bæa remitting spring at P: for when the cavern is filled highæ than the point N, the canal MNP vill act as a syphon; and, by the conditions assumed, it ill discharge the water ſaster than TO supplies it; it will therefore rum ĩt dry, and then the spring at P vill cease to furnish water. Ater some time the eavern will again be fſilled up to the height N, and the ſlow at P will recommence. Ifſ, besides this supply, the well P also receive water ſrom a constant source, we shall have a reciprocating spring. The situation and dimensions oſ this syphon canal, and the supply of the feeder, may be such, that the eſfiux at P will be constant. If the supply increase in a certain degree, a reciprocation will be produced at P vith very short imtervals; if the supply diminishes considerably, we shall have another kind oſ reciprocation with great intervals and great diſferences of water. IF the cavern has another simple outlet R, new varieties will be produced in the spring P, and R vill aſford a curious spring Let the mouth of R, by which the water enters it from the cavern, be lower than N, and let the supply oſ the feeding spring be no greater than R can discharge, we shall have a constant spring from R, and P will give no water. But suppose that the main ſeeder increases in vinter or in rainy seasons, but not 5 much as vill supply both P and R, the cavern will ſill till the water gets over N, and R vill be ruming all the while; but soon aſter P has begun io flow, and the vater in the cavern sinks below R, the stream from R will stop. The cavern vill he einptied by the syphon canal MNP, and then P vill stop. The cavern vill then begin to fill, and when near full R vill give a little water, and soon after P vill run and R stop as before, &e. Desaguliers shows, vol. ĩi. p. 177, &e. in what manner a prodigious variety of periodical ebbs and ſlows may be produced by underground canals, which are extremely simple and probable. WE shall conclude this artiele with the deseriptions of some pneumatical machines or engines which have not been particularly noticed under their names in the former volumes of this work. Bellows are of most extensive and important use; and it vill be oſ service to describe such as are of uncommon eonstruction and great power, ſit for the great operations in metallurgy. It ĩs not the impulsive force of the blast that is vanæ in most cases, but merely the copious supply of ai, io pm duce the rapid combustion of inflammable matter; nũ tæ service would be better perſormed in general if this emid be done vith moderate velocities, and an extended suriææ What are called air-ſurnaces, vhere a considerable surſa oſ inflammable matter is acted on at once by the curen which the mere heat of the expended air has produced, æ found more operative in proportion to the air expended tha blast furnaces animated by bellows; and we doubt not bu that the method proposed by M. Cotterel (æhich we hare àlready mentioned) of inereasing this current in a miing furnace by means of a dome, vill in time superæũ the blast ſurnacess There is indeed a great impulsive ſnœ required in some eases; as ſor blowing off the scræ from the surface oſ silver or copper in refining furnaces, or for keeping a clear passage for the air in the great iron furnace. In general, however, we canmot procure this abundant supply of air any other way than by giving it a great velo city by means of a great pressure, so that the general cnstruetion oſ bellows is pretty much the same in all kinds. The air is admitted into a very large eavity, and then &pelled from it through a small hole. The furnaces at the mines having been greatly enlargeò, it was necessary to enlarge the bellows also: and the leaiern bellows hbecoming exceedingly expensive, wooden on were substituted in Germany about the beginning of las century, and from them hecame general through Europ They consist of a wooden box ABCPFE (Fig. 2). which has its top and two sides ſlat or straight, and the end BAE ? formed into an arched or eylindrical surſace, of which the line FP at the other end ĩs the axis This box is open below, and receives within it the shallow hox EHGNML (Fig. 98), which exactly ſills it. The line FP m ſ the one coincides with FP oſ the other, and along: this ne is a set oſ hinges on which the upper box turns as it ises and sinks. The lower box is made fast to a frame xed in the ground. A pipe OQ proceeds ſrom the end of t, and terminates at the furnace, where it ends in a small ipe called the tewer or tuyeree. This lower box is open ibove, and has in its bottom two large valves V, V, openng inwardss. The conducting pipe is sometimes furnished with a valve opening outwards, to prevent burning coals from being sucked into the bellows when the upper box is dravn up. The joint along PF is made tight by thin leather nailed along it. The sides and ends oſ the fixed box are made to ſit the sides and curved end of the upper box, so that this last can be raised and lowered round the joint FP without sensible frietion, and yet without suffering much air to escape: but as this would not be suſficiently air-tight by reason of the shrinking and warping of the wood, a farther contrivance is adopted. A slender lath of wood, divided into several joints, and covered on the outer edge vith very soſt leather, is laid along the upper edges of the sides and ends of the lower box. This lath is so broad, that when its inner edge is even with the inside of the box, its outer edge projects about an inch. It is kept in this position by a number of steel wires, which are driven into the bottom of the box, and stand up touching the sides, as represented in Fig. 95, where a be are the vires, and e the lath, projecting over the outside of the box. BY this contrivance the laths are pressed close to the sides and curved end oſ the moveable box, and the spring wires yield to all their inequalitiess A bar of wood RS is ſixed to the upper board, by which it is either raised by machinery, to sink again by its ovn weight, having an additional load laid on it, or it is forced downward by a crank or wiper oſ the machinery, and afterwards raised. The operation here is precisely similar to that oſ blowing vith a chamber-bellovss When the board is lified up, iair enters by the valves V, V, Fig. 94. and ĩs expell a ik pipe OQ by depressing the boards. There is thenixe m occasion to insist on this pointThese bellows are made of a very great size, AD n; 16 feet, AB five feet, and the circular end AE alæ iæ feet. The rise, however, is but about 3 or 33 feet. They expel at each stroke about 90 cubie feet of air, and they make about 8 strokes per minute. Such are the hellows in general usæ on the continent We have adopted a different form n this kingdom, which seems much preſerablee We use an ron or voden /7linder, with a piston sliding nlong it. This may be mdæ with much greater accuracy than the vooden boxes, a les expense, if of wood, becaus it may be of ;per vort, held together by hoops; but the great advantage oſ this form is its being more easily maie air-tight. The piston b surrounded vith a broad strap of thick and soſt leather, and it has around its edge a deep groove, in which i lodęed a quantity of wool. This is ealled the packing or stuſſing, and keeps the leather very closely applied i the imæ surface of the eylinder. Iron cylinders may be very neatly bored and smoothed, so that the piston, even when very tight, ill slide along it very smoothly. To promote this, a quantity oſ black-lead is ground very fine with watæ, and a little of this is smeared on the nside of the cylndæ from time to time. The cylinder has a large valve, or sometimes two n iſæ bottom, by which the atmospheric air enters when the pis ton is drawvn up. When the piston ĩs thrust down, this ar is expelled along a pipe of great diameter, which terminate: in the furnace with a small orifice. This is the simplest form oſ bellows which can be eoceived. It differs in nothing but size from the belloused by the rudest nations The Chinese smiths have a ællows very similar, being a square pipe of wood ABCDE Fig. 96.), with a square board G which exactly fits it, noved by the handle FG At the farther end is the hlast sipe HE, and on each side of it a valve in the end of the square pipe, opening inwardss. The piston is suſficiently tight for their purposes without any leathering. The piston of this cylinder bellows is moved by machinery. In some blast engines the piston is simply raised by the machine, and then let go, and it descends by its own veight, and compresses the air below it to such a degree, that the velocity of efflux becomes constant, and the piston descends uniformly: for this purpose it must be loaded vwith a proper weight. This produces a very uniform blast, except at the very beginning, while the piston falls suddenly and compresses the air: but in most engines the piston rod iĩs forced down the cylinder with a determined motion, by means of a beam, erank, or other contrivancee This gives a more unequal blast, because the motion of the piston is necessarily slow in the beginning and end of the stroke, and quicker in the middle. But in all it is plaim that the blast must be desultory. It ceases while the piston is rising; for this reason it is usual to have two cylinders, as it was formerly usual to have two bellows which worked alternately. Sometimes three or four are used, as at the Carron iron-works. This makes a blast abundantly uniform. But an uniform blast may be made with a single eylinder, by making it deliver its air into another cylinder, which has a piston exactly fitted to its bore, and loaded vith a sufficient weightt. The blowing cylinder ABCD ig. 9.) has its piston P worked by a rod NP, connected by double chains, with the arched head of the working beam NO moving round a gudgeon at R. The other end O oſ this beam is connected by the rod OP, with the crank PQ oſ a wheel machine; or it may be connected with the piston of a steam-engine, &c. &c. The blowing eylinder Vou. III. 3BD has a valve or valves E in its bottom, opering m There proceeds from it a large pipe CF, which aen © regulating eylinder GHEI, and has a valv. a: mo pæ vent the air from getting back into the blovn; ſæiæ It is evident that the air forced into this cy linde mauæ jts piston L, and that it must aſterwards descæni, vis i other piston is rising It must descend uniſmm⸗ſ; æ make a perſectly equable blast. Observe, that if the piston L be at the bottom vhe i machine begins to work, it will be at the bottom at ũæal of every stroke, iſ the tuyere'l' emits as mud air a cylinder ABCD furnishes; nay, it will lie a wil o i bottom; for, while it was rising, air vas issuing thũ T. This would make an interrupted blast. To preve &, the orifice T must be lessened; but then there # æ: surplus of air at the end oſ each stroke, and the ſis: L vill rise continually, and at last get to the top, and àſlæ air to escape. It is just possible to adjust circumstææ s0 that neither shall happen. This is done easiæ by putting a stop in the way of the piston, and puttinga v on the piston, or on the condueting pipe ST, loaded wih a veight a little superior to the intended elasticity oſ e air in the cylinder. Therefore when the piston is ſeted by the stop from rising, the snifting valve, as it is œled, is forced open, the superfluous air escapes, and the blast preserves its uniformity. It may be of use to give the dimensions of a machine of this kind, which has worked for some years at a rery great furnace, and given satisſaction. The diameter of the blowing eylinder is 5 ſeet, and the length of the stroke is 6. Its piston is loaded with 83 lons It is worked by a steam- engine whose cylinder is 3 ſæt 4 inches vide, with a six-feet stroke. The regulating cyũder is 8 feet wide, and its piston is loaded with 84 ns making about 2,63 pounds on the square inch; and ĩt i very nearly in equilibrio with the load on the piston oſ he blowing cylinder. The condueting pipe KST is 12 nches in diameter, and the orifico of the tuyere was 13 nches when the engine was ereeted, hut it has gradually anlarged by reason of the intensæ heat to which it is exposed. The siſting valve is loaded with three pounds on the square inch. When the engine worked briskly, it made 18 strokes per minute, and there was always much air discharged by the snifting valvee When the engine made 15 strokes per minute, the snifting valve opened but seldom, so that things were nearly adjusted to this supply. Each stroke of the blowing cylinder sent in 1I8 cubic feet of common air. The ordinary pressure of the air being supposed 14ã pounds on an inch, the density of the air in the regulating cylinder must be lais:aæ =1,1783, the natural denE sity being I. This machine gives an opportunity of comparing the expence of air with the theory. It must (at the rate of Iã strokes) expel 80 cubie feet of air in a second through a hole oſf 1 inches in diameter. This gives a velocity of near 2000 feet per second, and of more than 160O feet ſor the condensed air. This is vastly greater than the theory can give or is indeed possible; ſor air does not rush nto a void with so great velocity. It shows with great evidence, that a vast quantity of air must eseape round the two pistonss. Their united circumferences amount to above 40 ſeet, and they move in a dry cylinder. It is impossible to prevent a very great loss. Accordingly, a candle held near the edge oſ the piston L has its flame very much disturbedl. This case, therefore, gives no hold for a caleulation; and it suggests the propriety oſ attempting to diminish this great waste. This has been very ingeniously done (in part at least) at s;ome other furnaces. At Omoah ſoundry, near Glasgov, the blowing eylinder (also vorked by a steam-engine) l delivers its air into a chest without a bottom, which is immersed in a large cistern of water, and supported at a small height from the bottom of the cistern, and has a pipe from its top leading to the tuyere. The water stands about ſive feet above the lower brim of the regulating air-chest, and by its pressure gives the most perfect uniformity of blast, vithout allowing a particle of air to get off by any other passage besides the tuyeree This is a very effectual regulator, and must produce a great saving of power, because a smaller blowing cylinder will thus supply the blast. We have not learned the dimensions and performance of this engine. We must observe, that the Ioss round the piston of the blowing cylinder remains undiminished. A blowing machine was erected many years ago at Chastillon, in France, on a principle considerably different, and which must be perſectly air-tight throughout. Two eylinders A, B (Fig. 98.) loaded with great weights, were suspended at the ends of the lever CD, moving round the gudgeon E. From the top F, G of each there was a large flexible pipe which united in H, from whence a pipe KT led to the tuyere T. There were valves at F and G opening outwards, or into the flexible pipes; and other valves L, M, adjoining to them in the top of each cylinder opening inwards, but kept shut by a slight spring. Motion was given to the lever by a machinee. The operation oſ this blowing machine is evident. When the cylinder A was pulled down, or allowed to descend, the water, entering at its bottom, compressed the air, and forced it along the passage FHKT. In the meantime, the cylinder B was rising, and the air entered by the valve M. We see that the blast will be very unequal, increasing as the eylinder is immersed deeper. It is needless to describe this machine more particularly, because we shall give an account of one which we think perſeet in its kind, and which leaves hardly any thing to be desired in a machine of this sort. It was invented by Mr John Laurie, land-surveyor in Edinburgh, many years ago, and improved in some respects since his death by an ingenious person of that city. ABCD (Fig. 99.) is an iron cylinder, truly bored within, and evasated a-top like a cup. EFGH is another, truly turned both without and within, and a small matter less than the inmer diameter of the first cylinder. This cylinder is close above, and hangs from the end of a lever moved by a machine. It is also loaded with weights at N. ILM is a third cylinder, whose outside diameter is somevhat less than the inside diameter of the second. This inner cylinder is fixed to the same bottom with the outer cylinde. The middle cylinder is loose, and can move up and down between the outer and inner cylinders, without rubbing on either of them. The inner cylinder is perforated ſrom top to bottom by three pipes OQ, SV, PR. The pipes OQ, PR have valves at their upper ends O, P, and communicate with the external air belov. The pipe SV has a horizontal part VW, which again turns upwards, and has a valve at top X. This upright part WXis in the middle of a cistern of water 7b Fę. Into this cistern is fixed an air-chest a YZ b, open below, and having at top a pipe c d  terminating in the tuyere at the furnace. When the machine is at rest, the valves X, O, P, are shut by their ovn weights, and the air-chest is full of wate. When things are in this state, the middle cylinder EFGH is drawn up by the machinery till its lower brims F and G are equal with the top RM of the inner cylinder. Now pour in water or oil between the outer and middle cylinders: it will run down and fill the space between the outer and inner cylinderss Let it come to the top of the inner cylinder. Nov let the loaded middle cylinder descend. It cannot do this without compressing the air which is between its top and the top of the inner cylinder. This air being compressed ill cause the water to descend between the inner and middle cylinders, and ris® between the midãle and outer cylinders, spreading into the cup; and as the middlæ cylinder advances downwards, the witer ill descend ſurther within it and rise farther without it. When it hãs got s0 ſar down, and the air has been 50 much compressed, that the difference between the surface of the water on the inside and outside of this cylinder is greater than the depth of water between X and the surſuce of the water ſꝶ, air will go out by the pipe SVW, and vill lodge in the air chest, and will remain there if c be shut, which we shall suppost for the present. Pushing down the midũle cylinder till the partition touch the top of the immer cylinder, all the air which was formerly between them ill be foreed into the air-chest, and will drive out water from ©t. Draw up the middle eylinder, and the external air will open ihe valves O, P, and again fill the space between the middle and inner eylinders; for the valve X will shut, and prevent the regress oſ the condensed air. By pushing down ithe middle eylinder a second time, more air vill be forced into the air-chest, and it will at last escape by getting out between its brims Y, Z, and the bottom of the cistern; or if we open the passage c, it will pass along the conduit c d æ to the tuyere, and form a blast. The operation oſ this machine is similar to Mr Haskinss quicksilver pump deseribed by Desaguliers at the end of the second volume of his Experimental Philosophy. The force which condenses the air is the load on the middle eylinder. The use of the water between the inner and outer cylinders is to prevent this air from escaping; and the inner eylinder thus perſorms the oſfice of a piston, having no frietion. It is necessary that the length of the outer and middle eylinders be greater than the depth oſ the regulator-cistern, that there may be a sufficient height fſor the vater io rise between the middle and outer cylinders, to balance the compressed air, and oblige it to go into the air-chest. A large blast-furnace will require the regulator- cistern ſive feet deep, and the cylinders about six or seven ſeet long. It is in fact a pump vithout ſriction, and is perſectly air-tight. The quickness of its operation depends on the small space between the middle cylinder and the two others; and this is the only use of these tvoo. Without these it would be similar to the engine at Chastillon, and operate more unequally and slowly. Its only imperfection is; that if the cylinder begin its motion of ascent or descent rapidly, as it ill do vhen worked by a steam-engine, there vill be some danger of water dashing over the top of the inner cylinder and getting into the pipe SV; but should this happen, an issue can easily be contrived for it at V, covered vithi a loaded valve v. This will never happen if thie eylinder is moved by a crank. One blowing eylinder only is represented here, but two may be used. We do not hesitate in recommending this form of bellows as the most perfect of any, and fit for all uses where standing bellos are required. They will be cheaper than any other sort fit for common purposes. For a common smith's ſorge they may be made with square vooden boxes instead of cylinders. They are also easily repaired. They are perſectly tight; and they may be made with a blast almost perſectly uniform, by making the cistern in which the airchest stands oſ considerable dimensions. When this is the case, the height of water, which regulates the blast, will vary very little. This may suſfice for an account of blast machiness. The leading parts oſ their construetion have been described as ſar only as was necessary for understanding their operation, and enabling an engineer to erect them in the most commodious manner. Views of complete machines might have amused, but they would not have added to our reader's inſormation. But the account is imperſect, unless we show how their parts may he so proportioned that they shall perform what is expected ſrom them. The engineer should know what size of bellows, and what load on the board or piston, and vhat size of tuyere, will give the blast which the service requires, and what force must be employed to give them the necessary degree oſ motionn. We shall accomplish these purposes by considering the efflux of the compressed air through the tuyeree The propositions formerly delivered will enable us to ascertain this. That we may proportion every thing to the power employed, we must recollect, that if the piston of a cylinder employed for expelling air be pressed down with any force ꝓ, it must be considered as superadded to the atmospheric pressure P on the same piston, in order that we may compare the velocity v of eſflux with the known velocity V with vhich air rushes into a void. By what has been formerly delivered, it appears that this velocity v/Vx/ , where P is the pressure of the atmosphere on the piston, and ꝑ the additional load laid on it. This velocity is expressed in feet per second; and, when multiplied by the area of the orifice (also expressed in square feet), it will give us the cubical feet of condensed air expelled in a second; but the bellows are always to be filled again with common air, and thereſore we vant to know the quantity oſ common air which will be expelled; for it is this vhich determines the number of strokes which must be made in a minute, in order that the proper supply may be obtainedl. Therefore recollect that the quantity expelled ſrom a given orifice with a given velocity, is in the proportion of the density; and that when D is the density of common air produced by the pressure P, the density d produced by the pressure P+p, is D23, or if D be r+7 Thereſore calling the area of the orifice expressed in made l, ve have d æ a square feet O, and the quantity oſ common air, or the cubic à expelled in a second Q, we have VxOx v/  ESP. P4ꝓ & It will be u" exact for all practical purposes to suppose P to be I5 pounds on every square inch of the piston; and ꝓ is then conveniently expressed by the pounds of additional load on every square inch: we may also take  1889 feet. As the orifice through which the air is expelled is generally very small, never exceeding three inches in diameter, it will be more convenient to express it in square inches; which being the , of a square foot, ve shall have the 1832 Tàa E / ?  P4p 2  x4f o/ & x , = O x 9,256x Pſꝓ P and this seems to æ as simple an expression as e can obtain. This will perhaps be illustrated by taking an example in numbers. Let the area oſ the piston be four square feet, and the area of the round hole through which the air is expelled be two inches, its diameter being 1,6, and let the load on the piston be 1728 pounds: this is three pounds on every square inch. We have P 15, p 83S, ? + pæ18, and O=2; thereſore we will have Q = 2x9,25x5 s 18 I This will however be diminished at least one- third by the contraction of the jet; and therefore the supply vill not exceed six cubic feet per second. Supposing thereſore that this blowing machine is a eylinder or prism oſ this dimension in its section, the piston so loaded would (aſter having compressed the air) descend about 15 inches in a second: it cubic ſeet of common air expelled in a seeond, or Q ,/2,053 cubic feet of common air expelled in a second. wouli ſirst sink ; of the whole length of the cylinder pretty suſſdenly, till it hãd redũted the air to the density 33, and would then descend uniformly at the above rate, expelling six cubic feet of common air in a second The computation is made much in the same way for bellows of the common form, with this additional circumstance, that as the loaded board moves round a hinge at one end, the pressure of the load must be calculated accordingly. The computation, however, becomes a little intricate, vhen the form of the loaded board is not rectangular; it is almost useless vhen the bellows have flexible sides, either like smith's bellows or like organ bellows, because the change of figure during their motion makes continual variation on the compressing powers. It ĩs therefore chiefly with respect to the great wooden bellows, of which the upper hoard slides down between the sides, that the above ealculation is of service. The propriety however of this piece of information is evident; we do not know precisely the quantity of air necessary for animating a furnace; but this calculation tells us what force must be employed ſor expelling the air that may be thought necessary. IF we have fixed on the strength of the blast, and the diameter of the cylinder, we learn the weight with which the piston must be loaded; the length oſ the cylinder determines its capacity, the above calculation tells the expense per second; hence we have the time of the piston's coming to the bottom. This gives us the number oſ strokes per minute: the load must be lifted up by the machine this number of times, making the time of ascent precisely equal to that of descent; otherwise the maehine vill èither cutcl and stop the descent of the piston, or àllow it to lie inactive for a while of each stroke. These cireumstances determine the labour to be performed by the machine, and it must be constructed accordingly. Thus the engineer will not be affronted by iĩts fuilure, nor will he expend needless power and eost. In mãchines which force the piston or bellows-hoard vwith a certain determined motion; different from vhat arises from their own weight, the computation is extremely intricate. When a piston moves by a crank, its motion at the beginhing and erid of eãch stroke is slow, and the compression and efflux is continually changing: we can hovever approximate  a statement of the ſorce required. Every time the pistun is dravn up, a certain space of the cylinder is filled again with air of the conimon density; and this is expelled during the descent of the piston. A certain number of eũbie feet of common air is therefore expelled with a velocity which perhaps continually varies; but there is a mèdium velocity with which it might have been imiformly expelled, and a pressure corresponding to this velocity. To find this, divide the area of the piston by the areã oſ the blast-hole (or rather by this area multiplied by 0,618, m order to take in the effect of the cuntracted jet), and multiply the length of the stroke performed in a second by the quotient arising ſfrom this division; the product is the medium velocity of the air (of the natural density). Then fiid by calculation the height through which a heivy hody must ſall in order to acquire this velocity; this is ſie height of a column of homogenèous air vhich would expel it with this velocity. The weight of this columm is the least ſorce that can be exerted by the engine: but this force is too small to overcome the redistince in the middle oſ the stroke, and it is too great even for the end of the stroke; and much too great for the beginning of it. But if the machine is turned by a very heavy water- wheel, this will act as a regulator, accumulating in itself the superſluous force during the too ſavourable positions of the crank, and exerting it by its vis insila during the time of grẽatest effortt A foròè not greatly exceeding the weight of this column of air vill therefore suffice:. On the other hand, if the strength of the blast be determined, which is the general state of the problem, this determines the degree of condensation of the air, and the load on the square inch of the piston, or the mean force which the machine must exert on itt. A table, which vill be given presently, determines the cubic feet of common air expelled in a second, corresponding to this load. This combined with the proposed dimensions of the eylinder, vill give the descent of the piston or the length of the stroke. These general observations apply to all forms oſ bellows; and without a knowledge of them no person can erect a machine for working them without total uncertainty or servile imitation. In order, thereſore, that they may be useful to such as are not accustomed to the management of even these simple formulæ, ve insert the following short table of the velocity and quantity of air discharged from a cylinder vhose piston is loaded with the pounds contained in the first column on every square inch. The second column contains the velocity with which the condensed air rushes out through any small hole; and the third column is the cubie feet discharged from a hole whose area is a square inch; column fourth contains the mean velocity of air of the common density; and column fiſth is the cubie feet of common air discharged; the sixth column is the height in inches at which the foree of the blast would support a column of vater if a pipe were inserted into the side of the cylinder. This is an extremely proper addition to such mechanies, showing at all times the power of the machines, and teaching us what intensity of blast is employed for different purposes. The table is computed from the supposition that the ordinary pressure of the air is 15 pounds on a square inch. This is somewhat too great, and therefore the velocities are a little too small; but the quantities discharged will be found about 3 too great (vwithout affecting the velocities) on acoount of the convergeney of the stream. I i I I ? 25 ] E 4 4 5 : This table extends far beyond the limits of ordinary use, very few blast-furnaces having a ſorce exeeeding 60 inches oſ water. We shall conclude this acoount of blowing machines vith a description of a small one for a blow-pipe. Fig. 100.) EFGH is a vessel containing water, about two feet deep. ABCD is the air-box of the blower open below, and having a pipe ILX rising up from it to a convenient height; an arm ON vhich grasps this pipe carries the lamp N: the blow-pipe LM comes from the top of the upright pipe. PEQ is the feeding pipe reaching near to the bottom of the vessel. Water being poured into the vessel below, and its cover being put on, which fits the upright pipe, and touches two studs a, a, projecting from it, blow in a quantity of air by the feeding pipe PQ; this expels the water from the airbox, and occasions a pressure which produces the blast through. the blow-pipe M. In a former paragraph of this article, ve mentioned an application which has been made of Heros fountain, at Chemnit⸗, in Hungary, for raising vater from the bottom of a mine. We shall now give an account of this very ingenious contrivance. In Fig. 10l. B represents the source of water elevated above the mouth of the pit 136 feet. From this there is led a pipe B”CDE four inches diameter. This pipe enters the top of a copper cylinder b c d e, 8 feꝶt high iæ æ diameter, and two inches thick, and ĩt ꝶade b vũi four inches of the bottom; it has 3 cok æ ſ. ſiæꝗ; linder has a cck at F, md a very large o; gs; Im the top b c proceeds a pipe GHE twõiĩnghes in ĩmæ hich goes down the pit 96 ſeet, and is jnunel mi top of another brass cylinder 7gh i, which is 54 ſæ iꝶt four feet diameter, and two inches thick, onæ ũ cubic ſeet, which is very nearly one half of the puuũ;à the other, viz. of I70 cubic feett. There is anthæ æ NI of ſour inches diameter, hich rises ſrom vithin ſæ inches of the bottom oſ this lower cylinder, is ĩùææ i to its top, and rises to the trough NO, which mæs the water from the mouth of the pit. This loæ ũder communicates at the bottom with the water L ĩiẽ collects in the drains of the minee. A large ok  ææ to admit or exelude this water; another cock M, æ ũ top of this cylinder, communicates with the exterml àr Nov suppose the cock C shut, and all the rx om: the upper eylinder will contain air, and the Iower eyſniæ vill be filled with water, because it is sunk so deę; that ũs top is below the usual surface of the mine-waters Noshut the eocks F, E, M, K, and open the cock C. The vater of the source B must run in by the oriſice D, mi rise in the upper cylinder, compressing the air abo- i and along the pipe GHH/, and thus acting on the suſæ of the water in the lower cylinder. It will thereſore cæ it to rise gradually in the pipe IN, where it will always b of such a height that its weight balances the elasticity ſ the compressed air. Suppose no issue given to the air ſfie the upper cylinder, it would be compressed into ;th oſit bulk by the column of 186 feet high; for a clumn oſ 3i feet nearly balances the ordinary elasticity of the air Thereſore vhen there is an issue given to it through th pipe GHH, it will drive the compressed air along this pip⸗ and it vill expel ater from the lower cylinder. Whe the upper cylinder is full of water, there will be 84 cubic feet of water expelled from the lower cylinder. If the pipe IN had been more than 136 feet long, the water wouli have risen 136 feet, being then in equilibrio with the water in the feeding pipe BACD (as has been already shown), by the intervention of the elastic air; but no more water would have been expelled from the lower cylinder than what fills this pipe. But the pipe being only 96 feet high, the water vill be thrown out at N with a very great velocity. If it were not for the great obstructions which water and air must meet with in their passage along pipes, it would issue at N vith a velocity of more than 50 ſeet per second. It issues much more slowly, and at last the upper cylinder is ſull of vater, and the water would enter the pipe GH and enter the lower cylinder, and without displacing the ar in it, would rise through the discharging pipe IN, and run off to waste. To prevent this there hangs in the pipe HGG a cork ball or double cone, ]by a brass wire, which is guided by holes in two cross pieces in the pipe HG. When the upper cylinder is filled with water, this cork plugs up the orifice G, and no water is wasted; the influx at D now stops. But the lower cylinder contains compressed air, which would balance water in a discharging pipe 186 ſeet high, vhereas IN is only 96. Therefore the water vill continue to flow at N till the air has so ſar expanded as to balance only 96 feet of water, that is, till it occupies ; of its ordinary bulk, that is, ; of the capacity of the upper cylinder, or 4”3 cubic ſfeet. Therefore 424 cubic feet vill be expelled, and the efflux at N vill cease; and the lower cylinder is about  full of water. When the attending workman observes this, he shuts the cck C. He might have done this before, had he known when the orific? G was stopped; but no loss ensues from the delay. At the same time the attendant opens the cock E, the water issues vith great violence, being pressed by the condensed air ſrom the lower cylinder. It thereſore issues with the s5um of its own weight and of this compression. These gradually decrease together, by the eſflux of the water and the expansion of the air; but this eſlux stops before all the vater has ſflowed out; for there is 424 feet of the lower cylinder occupied by air. This quantity of water remains, therefore, in the upper cylinder nearly: the workman knows this, because the discharged water is received first oſ all into a vessel containing ; of the capacity of the upper cylinder. Whenever this is filled, the attendant opens the cock X by a long rod which goes down the shaſt; this allows the water oſ the mine to ſill the lower eylinder, allows the air to get into the upper cylinder, and this allows the remaining water to run out of it. And thus every thing is brought into its first condition; and when the attendant sees no more water come out at E, he shuts the cocks E and M, and opens the cock C, and the operation is repeated. There is a very surprising appearance in the working of this enginee. When the eſſlux at N has stopped, if the cock F be opened, the water and air rush out together vith prodigious violence, and the drops of water are changed into hail or lumps of ico. It is a sight usually shown to strangers, vho are desired to hold their hats to receive the blast of air: the ice comes out with such violence as frequently to pierce the hat like a pistol bullett. This rapid congelation is a remarkable instance oſ the general fact, that air by suddenly expanding, generates cold, its capaeity for heat being increased. Thus the peasant cools his broth by blowing over the spoon, even from warm lungs; a stream of air from a pipe is always cooling. The above acoount of the procedure in working this engine shows that the efflux both at N and E becomes very slow near the end. It is found convenient therefore not to wait for the complete discharges, but to turn the cocks when about 30 cubic feet of water have been discharged at N: more work is done in this vay A gentleman oſ great aceuracy and knowledge of these subjects took the trouble, at our desire, oſ noticing particularly the perſormance oſ the machinee. He observed that each stroke, as it may be called, took up about three minutes and ;; and that 32 cubic feet of water were discharged at N, and 66 were expended at E The expense thereſore is 6õ feet of vwater falling 136 ſeet, and the perſormance is 32 raised 96, and they are in the proportion of 66X186 to 32x96, or of I to 0,84229, or nearly as 3 to I. This is superior to the performance oſf the most perfeet undershot mill, even when all friction and irregular obstruetions are neglected; and is not much inferior to any overshot pump-mill that has yet been erectedl. When we reflect on the great obstructions which water meets with in its passage through long pipes, we may be assured that, by doubling the size of the feeder and discharger, the performance of the machine vill be greatly improved; we do not hesitate to say, that it would be increased 3: it is true that it will expend more water; but this will not be nearly in the same proportion; for most of the deficiency of the machine arises from the needless velocity of the first efflux at N. The discharging pipe ought to be I10 feet high, and not give sensibly less water. Then it must be considered how inferior in original expense this simple machine must be to a mill of any kind which would raise 10 cubic feet 96 feet high in a minute, and how small the repairs on it need be, vhen compared vith a mill. And, lastly, let it be noticed, that such a machine can be used where no mill whatever can be put in motion A small stream of water, which would not move any kind of wheel, will here raise J; oſ its own quantity to the same height; working as fast as it is supplied. For all these reasons, ve think that the Hungarian machine eminently deserves the attention of mathematicians and engineers, to bring it to ĩts utmost perfection, and into Vou.. III. 3 E general usee. There are situations where this kind of machine may be very useful. Thus, where the tide rises 17 feet, it may be used for compressing air to  of its bulk; and a pipe leading ſfrom a very large vessel inverted in ĩt may be used ſor raising the water from à veasel of ĩ of its eapacity I7 ſeet high; or if this vesel has only of the capacity oſ the large one set in the tide- way, two pipes may be led from it; one into the small veasel, and the other into an equal vessel 16 feet higher, which reœives the water from the first. Thus ſs of the water may bæ raived 34 feet, and a smaller quuntity to a still greater height; and this with a kind of power that ean hardly bæ apphed in any other vay Machines of this kind are deseribed by Schottus, Sturmius, Leupold, and other old writers; and they should not be forgotten, because opportunities may offer of making them highly useſul. A gentlemans house in the country may thus be supplied with vater by a machine that vill cost little, and hardly go out of repũir. The last pneumatical engine which we shall speak of at present is the common fanners, used for wvinnowing grain, and for drawing air out of a room: and we have but feW observations to make on them. The wings of the fanners are enclosed in a eylinder or drum, whose circular sides have a large opening BDE (Fig. 102.) round the centre, to admit the air. By turning the wings rapidly round, the air is hurried round along vith them, and thus acquires a centrifugal tendency, by which it presses strongly on the outer rim of the drum: this is gradually detached from the cirele as at XI, and terminated in a trunk IHGF, which goes off in a tangential direction; the air therefore is driven along this passage. If the wings were disposed in planes passing through the axis C, the compression of the air by their anterior surface would give it some tendency to escape in every diree- tion, and would obstruet in some degree the arrival of more air through the side-holess They are therefore reclined a little backward, as represented in the figure. It may be shown that their best form would be that of a hyperbolic spiral a b; but the straight form approaches suſficiently near to the most perfect shape. How much labour is lost, however, in carrying the air round those parts of the drum where it cannot escape. The fanners would either draw or discharge almost twice as much air if an opening were made all round one side. This could be gradually contracted (vhere required for vwinnowing) by a surrounding cone, and thus directed against the ſallen grain: this has been verified by actual trial. When used for drawing air out oſ a room for ventilation, it would be much better to remove the outer side of the drum entirely, and let the air ſly freely oſf on all sides; but the ſlat sides are necessary, in order to prevent the air ſrom arriving at the fanners any other way but through the central holes, to which trunks should be fitted leading to the apartment which is to be ventilated. END OF VOLUME THIRD.